The Cornell Science Inquiry Partnerships ( CSIP ) will involve graduate fellows working with science teachers in grades 7-12 in rural and urban schools in upstate NY .
CSIP will have a broad disciplinary base , incorporating fellows from the Colleges of Agriculture and Life Sciences , Arts and Sciences , and Engineering .
Through CSIP , middle school and high school students will be engaged in three types of inquiry ( 1 ) open-ended explorations of unexplained phenomena , ( 2 ) highly structured investigations that proceed toward known outcomes and are designed to teach specific concepts or principles , and ( 3 ) activities that lead to an understanding of the nature of scientific research , ( e.g. , the importance of peer review ) .
Fellows also will teach specific concepts related to their research , the students ' inquiry projects , and required course content .
GK-12 fellows will develop leadership , mentoring , and teaching skills ; the ability to work in multidisciplinary teams ; and partnerships with faculty , peers , and teachers -- all of which will aid them in their research and future employment .
Teachers will enhance their ability to guide student researchers and will develop collaborations with universy faculty and community organizations .
Through CSIP , university students , faculty , and high school and middle school teachers will develop long-term partnerships , create new approaches to enhance inquiry learning , and update science content taught in secondary schools .
An important outcome of CSIP will be that these new instructional materials and models can be disseminated for the benefit of other students and teachers nationwide .
Partner School Districts Cortland City , Ithaca City , Newark Valley Central , Rochester City , Seneca Falls Central , Tompkins-Seneca-Tioga BOCES , Whitney Point CentralBudget $ 1,500,006 ( total for 3 years ) No of Fellows/year 10 Graduate FellowsTarget Audience Middle & High School Setting Urban , RuralDisciplines Life Sciences , Earth Science , Chemistry , Physics , Engineering Basing their work on their expertise in science and mathematics , teams composed of teachers , and graduate and undergraduate Fellows are developing new materials and adopting and adapting existing materials for problem- based learning ( PBL ) and interactive case based learning ( ICBL ) cases that integrate grade appropriate science and math content into locally relevant classroom modules .
The Fellows are assisting teachers in introducing and testing these cases and problems in a variety of middle and high schools in the Atlanta area .
In preparation for this work , the teams are participating in workshops on PBL and ICBL pedagogy , as well as teacher- designed introductions to urban education .
Each team is collaborating on developing plans that include a needs assessment , an action plan , an implementation plan and a communication plan .
The teams are also providing professional development for other teachers in the school .
The broader impacts of these activities include benefits to the Fellows , the teachers and the K-12 students involved .
The Fellow are gaining the skills and knowledge necessary to engage in active learning teaching pedagogies and reflective practice ; practice the teamwork required for interdisciplinary science collaboration that leads to success in modern scientific research ; communicate science effectively to a broader audience ; and to include outreach activities in their career goals when they are practicing scientists .
The teachers are enhancing and updating their Math /Science content knowledge and are sharing this knowledge with other teachers .
They are benefiting as well from enhanced articulation and communication between middle school and high school teachers and between teachers and college faculty and students .
The high school and middle school students involved are benefiting not only from the classroom modules being developed but are also interacting with role models to whom they can relate , leading to improved student interest in science and mathematics careers .
Part of the support for this project comes from the Directorate for Mathematics and Physical Sciences Title Problems and Research to Integrate Science and Mathematics ( PRISM ) Institution Emory University PI/Co-PI Joseph B .
Justice ; Patricia Marsteller , Preetha Ram Partner School Districts DeKalb County , City Schools of Decatur , Fulton County , Atlanta PublicFunding $ 1,493,055 # of Fellows/yr 10 Graduate , 10 UndergraduateSetting UrbanGrade Band middle-high schoolDisciplines Affected Science and Mathematics The objective of this Small Grant for Exploratory Research ( SGER ) is to characterize and correlate form errors in machined parts with machining process sequences and process variables used for generating the form .
This information will be used to ( a ) Provide feedback and establish clear guidelines for reducing form errors by optimal selection of process sequences and process parameters , ( b ) Develop methods for individualized optimal inspection plans for assessing the true value of each form error that are process sequence/ process variables specific , and ( c ) Develop form process capability indices for processes/machines .
For this research , two types of form errors , namely , Circularity and Cylindricity , will be considered .
The domain of processes considered will be limited to form features generated by conventional hole making processes and turning processes .
These form profiles/surfaces will be modeled using analytical Fourier Models and Generalized Cylinders .
Attributes of profiles/surfaces such as general shape , number of lobes , amplitude of lobes , eccentricity , evenness of lobe spacing , form errors , will be extracted by mapping profiles to a novel s-theta and psi-s domains .
A Neural network based approach will be used for training the system to predict standardized profiles , ranges of standardized attributes ( lobes , amplitude etc .
) as well as range of form errors based on process sequence and parameters .
For each family of standardized profiles , a Design of Experiments ( DOE ) based approach will be used for determining the optimum combination of sample size , sampling method , and evaluation algorithm ( least square or minimum zone ) for form inspection that is process specific for each profile family , and can estimate the true form error with a certain level of confidence .
A novel combinatorial optimization formulation in conjunction with Genetic Algorithms ( GA ) will be used to calculate minimum zones of the form errors .
Finally , based on standardized profiles and form errors for each profile family , a form process capability index will be developed for each of the form errors .
If successful , this research will provide a basis for predicting form profiles and errors based on process variables and sequence .
This could result in selection of optimal process plans/variables for reducing form errors .
This research will also provide guidelines for optimal inspection plans for assessing form errors that are specific to the process creating the form .
Finally , the form process capability indices developed can be used for optimal manufacturing tolerance allocation , design centering and machine selection .
Such a plan can readily be used by designers as well as practitioners on the shop floor .
Teacher-Fellow teams are developing and delivering a roster of hands on experiences and workshops at the schools that promote student interest and awareness of theenvironmental sciences and current environmental issues in Puerto Rico .
The Fellows are bringing environmental materials and tools to the classroom and helping teachers and K-6 students develop the ability to use these materials and tools .
The teams are also bringing the classroom to the site of experimental fieldwork .
The participants are working with and learning from a variety of partners in addition to the resources provided by UMET the Institute of Tropical Forestry , an NSF-funded Long-Term Ecological Research project site , and the doctoral program in marine sciences at the University of Puerto Rico , Mayaguez .
Faculty participating include the Dean of the School of Environmental Affairs and represent a wide array of disciplines at UMET that have the environment as the central focus marine sciences , oceanography , chemistry , toxicology , forestry , ecology , botany , geology , environmental education , coastal resources , natural resources , and environmental communication .
These efforts to develop a comprehensive and cohesive effort in environmental sciences education for the island are enhanced by collaborating with the Mayaguez Campus of the University of Puerto Rico as UMET focuses on the northeastern part of Puerto Rico and the Mayaguez Program focuses on the west coast of the Island .
The schools involved are in an area of the island that has a high degree of unemployment and only minimal access to basic services .
The broader impacts of this project include the model it provides of bringing environmental sciences content knowledge and technical skills to a set of students and teachers who previously had little access to either and the opportunity it provides for the university involved to broaden and enrich its own program through cooperation with neighboring institutions .
This project is receiving partial support from the Directorate for Biological SciencesProject title Fellows Enhancing Science and Technology ( FEST ) Institution Universidad Metropolitana ( UMET ) PI/Co-PI Juan Musa , Alberto Rivera RentasPartner School Districts ; CarolinaFinancing $ 1,492,509 Number of fellows per year 8 graduate , 8 undergraduateSetting Rural Target audience of the project elementary NSF supported disciplines involved Environmental Sciences and Technology The connections between higher- level mathematics such as abstract algebra and mathematics generally taught at the secondary level are deep .
But rarely are these connections made explicit in the education of pre-service teachers Hence their potential contributions to the teaching of secondary mathematics is left undiscovered .
These connections are often left undiscovered in professional development for in-service teachers as well .
Seeing the Connections is a collaborative among the Education Development Center , The University of New Hampshire and California State University at Chico .
The project produces , pilots , and disseminates curriculum modules that help teachers develop a knowledge of mathematics for teaching that bridges the gap between higher level mathematics and the mathematics generally taught at the secondary level .
These modules form a library of materials that are innovative in addressing the needs of both pre-service and practicing secondary mathematics teachers .
The project builds mechanisms to ensure wide dissemination of the developed material , which contributes to the intellectual merit of the field .
The project pilots both new and revised materials from previous proof of concepts for a variety of college and university settings for both mathematics content courses and mathematics education courses .
The broader impacts are realized through the broad piloting and dissemination of the developed modules .
Building upon and expanding a previous GK-12 project ( DGE 9979550 ) , this partnership between the Colleges of Science and Education at Wayne State University ( WSU ) and the administration and teachers of the Detroit Public Schools ( DPS ) Fellow/teacher teams is working in two Detroit inner city middle schools , ( Foch and Hally ) .
The teams negotiate the role of each team member and discuss science and mathematics content and concepts ; effective classroom management techniques ; and teaching methods and the research on teaching and learning that undergirds them during summer workshops in pedagogy and classroom management and academic year Math and Science workshops .
The subject foci of these workshops are determined by the requirements of state standards and the needs of the middle school classes .
They provide fellows with content knowledge outside of their major and give the teacher and fellow teams a more coherent view of middle school math and science .
In addition to their work with teachers in the classroom , the Fellows organize and participate in family mathematics and science nights , assist with science fairs , and forge ties between the schools and community based outreach organizations , such as The Greening of Detroit , Earth Force and Friends of the Rouge .
Wayne State science , math and engineering faculty visit the partner schools and conduct science and math activities with the students .
The broader impacts of the program include the strong partnership being forged between the students and faculty of Wayne State and the students and faculty of two urban schools with predominantly African American student populations and the many community groups , including parents , it is enlisting in its effort to build a local comprehensive learning community that nourishes children 's interests and abilities in mathematics , the sciences and technology .
Overall broader student and teacher contacts are being developed and there is an increase in the number of faculty participating in outreach activities .
Part of the support for this project comes from the Directorate for Mathematics and Physical Sciences .
Title GK-12 , Detroit Science and Mathematics Fellowship Program , Institution Wayne State University PI/co-PI Regina Zibuck , PI ; Maria Ferreira , Carl Freeman , Wayne State ; Karen Harrison , Nancy Varner , Detroit Public SchoolsFunding $ 1,498,265 total for 3 yearsPartner School District Detroit Public Fellows per year 6 graduate and 14 undergraduate Target grades 6-8 Setting UrbanNSF supported disciplines involved Science and Mathematics The goals of this evaluative research project are 1 ) to review how partnership performance is evaluated in the STEM educational community and also in a variety of other settings drawn from other policy contexts , industry , and not-for-profit ; and 2 ) to develop and test a model exploring how degrees of embeddness among partners influence the process by which STEM educational outcomes are pursued and achieved .
A panel of STEM evaluation and education experts will participate in an online Delphi panel whose goal is to develop an evaluative model for linking embedded partnership relations to educational outcomes .
This model will be tested with up to four systemic initiatives for retrospective insights into partnership activities and with at least two ongoing Math and Science Partnership projects .
This award provides funding to Colorado State University for Nancy Levinger with the Chemistry REU Leadership Group to host a Workshop for selected REU ( Research Experience for Undergraduates ) and LS-AMP ( Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation ) Program Directors to explore ways for these two major NSF programs to operate synergistically to lead to mutually beneficial interactions for both programs .
Also funded will be travel grants for over 50 students each year to participate in the spring ACS ( American Chemical Society ) Meetings in 2003 and 2004 .
These travel awards will leverage additional funds and facilitate the attendance at both of these meetings for 100-150 students participants each year .
Inter-institutional interactions and possible collaboration between REU faculty and site directors will also be promoted .
Support is also provided for regular meetings of the Chemistry Leadership Group to meet to proceed with implementing the recommendations from the Spring 2001 Workshop for the Chemistry REU Site Directors .
Items that these meetings will address also include program evaluation and development , and explore cooperative ventures between different programs .
This study proposes to conduct rigorous research on the strategic use of classroom talk for teaching mathematics to middle grade non-English speaking students .
They will seek to learn whether discourse-intensive mathematics instruction between teachers and students , and between students and students , is effective in a three-year micro-analytic study of student learning in four discourse-intensive versions of connected Mathematics .
Paper and pencil tests of the concepts in the lessons will be collected , students will be videotaped in clinical interviews , and a detailed analysis of the videotapes will be conducted .
The same teachers will deliver the teaching modules in two different formats to matched classes of 7th grade students .
The student population will be mostly non-English speaking students of low-income backgrounds .
Teachers will receive training in the methods .
The panel considered this proposal to be an outstanding proposal because it was based on a previous study by the author of the proposal , cites other relevant research , and has a strong group of advisors .
Recent research into the learning process has begun to show how students learn and what environments are best to facilitate learning .
There are many barriers that have prevented widespread adoption of these new teaching paradigms , including the investment of time needed to make a change ; lack of tested models and materials ; and support systems to enable and encourage faculty to continue an innovation .
To address these needs , collaborators at Franklin and Marshall College , SUNY Stony Brook , and Washington College have developed innovative and effective teaching methods and materials for General , Organic , and Physical Chemistry instruction .
Constructivist and learning cycle principles are combined with an emphasis on essential learning processes and student-student interactions to create a new educational model called Process Oriented Guided Inquiry Learning ( POGIL ) .
The practices and materials we have developed are applicable to large or small classrooms , recitation sections with or without technology , and laboratories .
The approach and the new materials have all been nationally tested and are readily available .
The project goals include faculty development , dissemination of new practices , and adoption of innovation through workshops , consultancies and on-site visits .
An Innovation-Adoption Model is being used to assess the various components of dissemination that lead to innovation .
A major objective of the project is to create an interconnected network of experts and adopters in order to increase the rate of adoption .
A research team at The Catholic University of America is evaluating the effectiveness of this project .
The goal of the workshop is to bring together a multidisciplinary group of researchers to identify promising research directions in authentication , information hiding , and related areas .
The researchers come from diverse communities including signal processing , information theory , coding theory , cryptography , and computer science .
Each researcher will present a 20-minute talk followed by questions from the audience .
There will also be a few short panel-type sessions in which everyone participates .
This project addresses the issues of attracting , engaging , and competently training students in computer science by developing innovative multimedia-based instructional software for introductory computer science classes .
The software tools is built on top of an existing system called Online Web-based Learning ( OWL ) , a system that has been used with great success in chemistry , physics , and mathematics .
This project identifies three broad characteristics of first year CS instruction in object-oriented ( OO ) programming instruction , particularly in Java 1 ) there is too much material for students to learn in a single 14 week semester ; 2 ) staffing in introductory courses is stretched too thinly and devotes too much time to background chores such as grading ; and 3 ) because of very uneven instruction in high schools and varying expectations about the purpose of programming instruction , student competence , interest , and expectation varies greatly in a single class .
Moreover three additional features characterize defects in teaching strategies 1 ) students are reluctant to read code ( programs ) carefully ; 2 ) students often complete the first two semesters of Java programming instruction with a very poorly developed sense of high-level design ; and 3 ) students are isolated and work together poorly .
We are implementing the following pedagogical and technical remedies for these problems in the context of the first two courses in a traditional CS curriculum , introduction to programming and data structures .
These remedies include the development of a wide range of on-line exercises that teach about the fundamental concepts of OO programming and data structures ; the development of exercises that train students to be careful code-readers ; the development of exercises that teach students first to understand code from a UML perspective , and second to use UML thinking to design code at a high level ; and finally , through the mechanism of an informal drop-in center , and through the development of multi-student on-line exercises , we train students to collaborate more effectively with their peers .
Project Summary Teacher-Fellow GK-12 teams are introducing , ocean based science into Pineallis County K-8 classrooms , aligning their efforts with the Earth Science , Life Science , and Physical Science content strands in the Florida state science standards .
The teams collaborate to discover and then meet the expressed needs of school district administrators .
Through their work with the Fellows , the teachers , many of whom have little previous background in ocean science , are becoming adept at stimulating and elevating students ' interest in a variety of science topics by capitalizing on the fact that Florida is surrounded on three sides by ocean .
Faculty collaborators from the College of Marine Science and the College of Education serve as mentors and educators to provide professional support in content and pedagogy for Fellows and teachers .
Recruiting strategies for student and faculty participation capitalize on the growing interest of College of Marine Science graduate students in education , outreach learning and teaching opportunities , and the initiation of expanded Ocean Science content based Science Education degree programs offered by the College of Education .
The broader impacts of the project are reflected in the benefits accruing to each of the participants .
The Fellows are becoming better prepared for the classroom environment and are developing improved communication skills in such areas as connecting with diverse audiences .
The participating teachers , many of whom have little academic background in ocean science , by working with content experts , are becoming adept at capitalizing on the fact that Florida is surrounded on three sides by ocean to stimulate and elevate students interest generally in a variety of science topics .
Other teachers benefit from the resources the teams have developed and put on the web .
The K-8 students benefit from their interaction with real-life scientists who act as role models and content specialists , and who are a source of career information .
Schools benefit through 1 ) professional development for teachers which expands both their content knowledge and inquiry-based instructional skills , and 2 ) an improved science learning environment for students which incorporates the local ocean setting into real world science applications .
The higher education partners benefit because the project facilitates collaboration between scientists and educators , fosters development of innovative degree programs , and serves as a recruitment incentive for prospective graduate students in Marine Science and Education .
Title of Project GK-12 OCEANS Graduate Teaching Fellows in K-12 Education Institution University of South Florida PI/CoPI Teresa Greely and Paula CobleCooperating District and Schools Pinellas County , Canterbury School of Florida Number of Fellows per year 10 graduates , 3 undergraduatesSetting Urban , Suburban Target Audience of the project K-8 NSF supported disciplines involved Geosciences/Ocean Science DMS-0231521Ira Wayne LewisThe Department of Mathematics and Statistics of Texas TechUniversity will host the Spring Topology and Dynamical SystemsConference 2003 .
This conference will feature over 20 invitedspeakers and will have special sessions in each of the areas ofContinuum Theory , Dynamical Systems , General Topology , GeometricGroup Theory , Geometric Topology and Topological Algebras , aswell as providing opportunities for contributed talks .
Thisconference will build on a heritage of such conferences heldeach year since 1967.This conference will provide a forum for an international groupof up to 200 researchers to present and discuss the latest researchresults and open questions .
Topics covered will range over abroad spectrum but all have a common link to the core of topology.Among topics to be discussed by invited speakers are virtualknot theory , fixed points and periodicity , bottlenecks indendroids , indecomposable Banach spaces and applications oftopology .
The invited speakers have been nominated by a steeringcommittee of leading researchers in the areas .
Graduate studentparticipation will also be strongly encouraged and supported .
AbstractThe goal of this project is to improve inquiry-based instruction of science , technology , and mathematics in Appalachian middle schools .
The program will provide fellowships for eight graduate and four undergraduate students per year to work with twelve science and mathematics middle school teachers from six different middle schools .
Each Fellow will team up with a middle school teacher and a university mentor to develop and implement inquiry-based activities , designed to meet Kentucky and national education standards .
Several training sessions , including an intensive one-week summer workshop , are planned for all participants .
Overall the project will have broad impact , as it is expected to lead to enriched learning by middle school students , provision of professional development opportunities for middle school teachers , improved communication and teaching skills for the Fellows , and strengthened partnerships between EKU and regional middles schools .
Part of the support for this project comes from the Directorate for Mathematics and Physical Sciences.Title Enhancing Inquiry-Based Science and Math in Appalachian Middle SchoolsInstitution Eastern Kentucky UniversityPI Tom Otieno .
Co-PIs Melinda S. Wilder , Brandon Hargis , Jerry D. Cook , William W. Farrar , Malcolm P. Frisbie , Kirk E. Jones and Chongkye Rhee.Funding ; $ 1,341,668 total for 3 yearsFellows per year Eight graduate and four undergraduate fellows Setting RuralTarget audience of the project Middle schools in Appalachian KentuckyDisciplines involved Biological Sciences , Chemistry , Computer Science , Earth Sciences , Physics and Astronomy , and Mathematics and Statistics .
This research is being done in conjunction with IIS-9731990 , which is beingperformed by Michael Pazzani in the Information and Computer ScienceDepartment at the University of California , Irvine .
The research isconcerned with intelligent decision aids that can be developed by datamining techniques .
Experience has determined that such systems can learnaccurate models , but that experts in areas where those models are used indecision aids are often reluctant to trust them because they do not , forinstance , use the same tests intermediate conclusions or abstractions thatthe experts have grown to trust .
Or they do not use certain factors at allthat experts feel to be relevant .
Experts also want models that are stableunder small changes in the data being analyzed .
Psychologists havediscovered factors that simplify the learning , understanding , andcommunication of category and process information by humans .
This researchseeks to explore these psychological principles in light of the output ofexisting KDD algorithms and then go on to develop and evaluate new KDDalgorithms that will provide output that is easy for people to learn , use , and communicate to others .
With the results of this research , it should bepossible to make such decision aids more human centered , so that theywill be used more often and more effectively in practice.http//www.gatech.edu/psychology/faculty.htm This award supports the intial phase of a planned 4 year project that seeks to investigate , develop , and report on the technical and scientific merit of designing and deploying , at scale , very small integrated environmental monitoring systems .
These will consist of integrated digital radios , sensors , and power systems that are able to link to the internet for bi-directional data flow , and to link to such projected research networks as the planned national ecological observatory network ( NEON ) .
This entire project has as its goal the development of an entirely new scalable paradigm of no-license networked wireless connectivity .
The initial work , to be funded through this award , will entail developing design parameters for classes of very small radios integrated with networking protocols , miniaturized configurable processors , interchangeable sensors , and advanced power supplies .
An important component of the effort will be a first-hand assessment of the needs of field researchers working in a variety of ecosystems and physical environments .
This project , which is made possible by recent advances in electromagnetic wave propagation and evolving rules for no-license use of digital radios , has the potential to give access to principal researchers , collaborators , students , and the general public to raw , as well as processed and stored , field data - in the form of numbers , audio , and video .
It will also introduce large numbers of people to the potential of advanced wireless technology for science .
The science literacy needs of future teachers and other non-science majors are being addressed through implementation of a multi-site college level interdisciplinary science course sequence based on the National Science Education Standards and focused on real-life issues .
Instructional capacity is also being addressed through faculty professional development and curriculum materials upgrades involving faculty from five institutions ( University of South Florida , Hillsborough Community College , Manatee Community College and St. Petersburg College from Florida and Fairmont State College in West Virginia ) .
Project direct outcomes include a network of 15-25 prepared instructors , 10-12 upgraded modules ( beta versions ) , and measures of improved science literacy of the target student population , a diverse population of college students including those preparing to be teachers .
Intellectual Merit Faculty in the program are introduced to recent literature on learning and practice these strategies through the implementation of the Science That Matters courses and curricular material .
Faculty reflection and feedback is used to improve instruction and the curricular materials .
Measures of student outcomes included Test of Logical Thinking ( TOLT ) , The ACT 's Collegiate Assessment of Academic Progress ( CAAP ) , a project developed writing assessment measuring intellectual progress , and faculty assessment of student learning .
Broader Impacts The project provides a model two course sequence and curricular materials for achieving science literacy among non science majors/future elementary school teachers .
Implementation at diverse institutions and among diverse student populations provides valuable guidance for implementation around the nation and for continuing improvements to materials .
The modular curricular materials and the evaluation instruments are broadly applicable and useful to a diverse audience .
Hundreds of thousands of student and faculty hours are devoted annually in the U.S. to the undergraduate science lab report , an exercise reflecting and perpetuating many of the shortcomings in science education identified in such reports as the NRC 's 1999 Transforming Undergraduate Education in SMET .
With comparatively small development and dissemination costs , our project team ( from science communication , scientific visualization , botany , chemistry , and physics ) is attempting to harness this ubiquitous activity to improve the way students write , visualize , and understand science .
Our first goal is to revise and disseminate for national use our online prototype , developed , piloted , and assessed through our one-year NSF-CCLI grant in 2000-01 .
LabWrite , a series of instructional and faculty development modules , encourages and enhances use of the lab report so that students and instructors can take advantage of the opportunities it offers to develop and expand students ' scientific literacy .
Our second goal is to build an instructional infrastructure for improving the teaching and learning experience of the laboratory nationwide .
Materials and faculty workshops are being piloted within physics , chemistry , and biology courses at NC State and at a small liberal arts women 's college , a historically black university , a community college , and a large , comprehensive university .
Once fully tested and revised , we anticipate publishing LabWrite as a supplement to science textbooks as well as a comprehensive interactive package for a variety of lab classes .
This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will outline a plan to commercialize the retargetable power-aware compilation technology that we have developed over the past several years .
The central thesis of this proposal is that much speculative information about a program can be extracted at compile time that is currently not exploited .
This information can then be exposed and used in making operational decisions ( such as throttling various system sub- units ) to reduce power consumption with minimal ( or no ) impact on performance .
Our approach relies primarily on compiler-based energy reductions , rather than on circuit and architectural techniques .
The key difference between our work and that of others is that we do not require all our compiler-derived information to be provably correct all that we require is that predictions are correct often enough that they can be usefully exploited in making resource-control decisions .
Relaxing the requirement to be provably correct in making predictions ( of , for instance , the instruction-level parallelism of certain portions of a program ) greatly reduces the complexity of otherwise highly sophisticated analysis techniques ( e.g. , flow-sensitive alias analysis ) and expands their scope to large and complex applications .
Extensive preliminary work has been carried out to validate this approach .
We believe this approach is orthogonal to many other power-aware approaches currently being used , and that its effects can be additive to these traditional approaches .
Further , the nature of our approach lends it to being retrofitted to current technology .
Extensive analysis of the significant power-aware computing market indicates the high level of applicability of our techniques to a very wide range of applications .
This Small Business Innovation Research ( SBIR ) Phase I project will demonstrate the feasibility of fabricating carbon nanofiber reinforced carbon-carbon ( C-C ) composite by integrating catalytic nanofiber growth and carbon deposition into a single operation .
The main advantage of this process is the ability to directly fabricate components on substrates at a high rate thus it avoids the conventionally used lengthy C-C fabrication approach with multiple steps .
As a result , the manufacturing complexity , the process cycle time , and the cost will be greatly reduced .
In addition , since high density carbon and high strength carbon nanofibers are engineered in an integrated form , the C-C composite is expected to have unprecedented mechanical properties compared with conventional C-C composite .
Commercially this technology will increase the reliability and reduce manufacturing cost , thus making the American C-C composite products more competitive in the world market .
One immediate application of this composite will be for aircraft brake components .
The technology can also be applied to many other applications such as computer hard disc media substrates and the next generation medical implants .
The overall objective of the project is to inspire K-12 students in the study ofbiodiversity and give graduate fellows an understanding of issues in K-12 education .
This project connects the museums and field stations at UC Berkeley with the local K-12 community .
Early in the academic year , the graduate fellows take the K-12 students and their teachers on a field trip to one of the Berkeley Natural History Field Stations that allow access to diverse natural habitats in California .
The students collect natural history items that form the kernel of subsequent classroom activities .
Together with the graduate fellows , the school students curate and/or identify the specimens collected using additional information from the large BNHM collections .
The K-12 students and teachers enter specimen data and associated information into a database , which is linked to the already established databases of the BNHMs , and has a web interface .
They then use interpretive tools to study their data .
The students develop hypotheses , based on the information collected and analyses performed , and test these in the field .
The data that the students generate and associated interpretations are shared among participating schools , and the information is made accessible to schools throughout the Bay Area .
There are broad impacts from this project to a number of beneficiaries .
The PIs and graduate fellows benefit from ( i ) the expanded database on spatial and temporal patterns of biodiversity , information that is critical to developing hypotheses as to historical processes responsible for biogeographic patterns , current factors affecting distributions , and future trajectories ; and ( ii ) development of skills in communication and leadership .
The K-12 teachers benefit from direct involvement in research and enrichment in the approach to , and understanding of , evolutionary biology , including a strong sense of participation in monitoring of biodiversity .
The schools benefit from the enhanced access to technology , and development of their own natural history collections and associated databases coupled with interpretive tools.Project title GK-12 Exploring California Biodiversity Institution University of California BerkeleyPI/Co-PI Rosemary Gillespie , Donald Dahlsteen , David Lindbergh , Craig Moritz , Mary PowerPartner School Districts West Contra Costa Unified , Funding $ 1,432,160 total for 3 yearsNo of fellows/yr 6 graduate , 2undergraduate , yr 1 ; 8 graduate , 8 undegraduate yr 2,3Setting UrbanTarget audience middle-high schoolNSF supported disciplines involved Science and Mathematics , Environmental Science This proposal provides staff support for the AMPATH project .
This project in advanced networking infrastructure and an international exchange point for research and education is based in Miami , Florida at Florida International University ( FIU ) .
The project will connect at least 10 countries ' National or Regional Research and Education Networks ( NRENS ) , and will provide advanced networking connectivity to US e-Science applications and major instrumentation interests in Latin America and the Caribbean .
The future work plan objectives proposed will assist information sharing between the region and US scientific researchers and educators , using Internet based computational grids and major research instrumentation .
The specific work plan includes objectives to ( 1 ) Enable and support strategic US-led projects in South and Central America , Mexico and the Caribbean ( 2 ) Connect the NRENs in the AMPATH Service Area to the global R & E networking community ( 3 ) Develop an outreach and dissemination program through conferences , workshops and other channels to increase awareness of AMPATH and its benefit to the global R & E networking community ( 4 ) Develop a technology plan that will enable the AMPATH network to support e-Science and experimental networks The proposal uses The August , 2001 AMPATH Workshop Report prepared by a committee of US researchers , as the foundation of its funding request .
To launch the AMPATH project , Global Crossing donated 10 DS3 ( 45 Mbps ) circuits for three-year periods , staggered depending on the connection date of each NREN .
Cisco Systems , Lucent Technologies and Juniper Networks donated carrier-class network equipment ; and Terremark Worldwide , Inc. donated collocation space in the NAP Of The Americas .
Since June 2001 , the AMPATH project has connected three National Research and Education Networks in South America REUNA of Chile , RNP of Brazil , and RETINA of Argentina ; the Academic Network of Sao Paolo , ANSP5 , which is a State-funded network ; the University of Puerto Rico ; the Arecibo observatory ; and the Gemini-South telescope .
The NRENs of Colombia , Mexico , Panama , Peru and Venezuela remain to be connected to the project .
The final DS3 is to connect the R & E network of the US Virgin Islands , primarily targeted to the distributed campuses of the University of the Virgin Islands .
Until funding is received this work is done on a best-effort basis by the PI and Co-PI , the Chief Network Engineer and the International Coordinator for the AMPATH project .
NSF will establish a significant piece of international infrastructure by funding this project and connecting NRENS for the region .
This Small Business Innovation Research ( SBIR ) Phase I project will develop a key technology designed to enhance the definition and characterization of oil reservoirs , by using state-of-the-art 3-D prestack depth imaging technology coupled with advanced rock physics principles to produce high-resolution petrophysical and structural information .
Briefly stated , this technology will allow oil and gas companies to extract rock information from seismic data .
Extensions to this technology are not limited to only 3-D or 4-D ( time lapse ) imaging , but can also be applied to medical imaging , EPA projects of identifying buried hazardous substances , remote imaging using ground penetrating radar , etc .
The complete software package will be a state-of-the-art program offering features and utilities that are presently unavailable in the exploration industry .
The commercial potential of the technology proposed is considerable because it allows 3-D and 4-D seismic data to be much more effectively used to characterize and delineate oil reservoirs and to monitor enhanced oil recovery processes .
This area of seismic imaging and reservoir characterization is greatly influenced by technology developments and represents a fast commercial growth sector .
This advanced technology directly impacts the discovery and recovery of hydrocarbons and could decrease dependence on imported oil .
In existing oil fields , better seismic images of complicated subsurface geology directly coupled with petrophysical information , can reduce development costs and increase the amount of hydrocarbons recovered .
This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project designs and develops an adaptive remote-data access system for wireless handheld devices .
The key innovations in the project include adaptive data compression and adaptive partitioning techniques to save network bandwidth and battery consumption .
The central concept is the ability to adapt to the changing wireless network environment and to different types of data .
The proposed techniques go beyond existing bandwidth-saving techniques such as nonadaptive compression and diff-based data synchronization .
A research prototype will be built for extensive experimentation in order to measure the effectiveness of the proposed technique for the saving of network bandwidth and battery consumption .
This prototype will integrate heterogeneous systems , runtime systems , and compiler techniques .
Commercial Applications of Research The success of this research will lead to a software product which provides users of wireless handheld devices with secure , convenient , and cost-effective access to the data ( and associated applications ) located on their stationary computer systems , such as desktop machines and servers .
This product can be used by both business and individual users for various functionalities which require to access data stored on the main computer systems in the form of text , graphics , photographs , data images , speeches , sound , and so on .
The adaptive features of the system fulfill the need of remote-centric workforce to access host-based data and applications from anywhere at any time over wireless connections in a highly cost-effective way .
This US-Croatian workshop on biocomplexity and sustainable ecosystem management will take place in Dubrovnik , Croatia , during October 1-6 , 2002 .
The U.S. organizers are Carl Hershner and Anamarija Frankic from the College of William and Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science .
Their Croatian counterparts are Vera Zutic of the Rudjer Boskovic Institute , Zagreb , and Adam Benovic of the Institute of Oceanography and Fisheries , Dubrovnik .
The workshop goal is to define an interdisciplinary approach to research on and management of biologically complex ecosystems in the Adriatic Sea , where natural and human systems are interdependent .
The Dubrovnik meeting will bring together U.S. and Croatian researchers who have direct knowledge of the Adriatic and the Chesapeake Bay and possess complementary expertise in coastal and marine ecosystems research or social and economic sciences .
Workshop discussions will feature 1 ) the functioning of large scale coastal ecosystems , 2 ) sustainable human interaction , 3 ) biodiversity changes , and 4 ) socio-economic implications of management options .
Results are expected to lead to a refined theoretical framework for innovative collaborative projects that integrate field studies and employ suitable biological , hydrologic , and socio-economic models for the purpose of understanding and managing similarly complex marine systems around the globe .
.
This biocomplexity workshop project fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling experts in the United States and South Central Europe to combine complementary talents and share research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence .
This is a Small Grant for Exploratory Research ( SGER ) to explore the effects of team-based effects on learning engineering at the undergraduate level .
The work will be undertaken in two main phases .
The first phase includes the development , validation , and testing of a new student assessment protocol for team-based learning in engineering .
The second phase includes the development and use of an observation protocol in assessing team behaviors , which will be used in refining the model of team design offered in the proposal .
Several propositions have been put forth as to what factors affect the outcomes of group learning experiences .
The work will take place at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln , Pennsylvania State University , and with students participating in electronic teams as part of the National Collegiate Inventors and Innovators Alliance ( NCIIA ) .
The team represents expertise in engineering and educational psychology .
Flexible AC Transmission System ( FACTS ) devices refer to rapidly switching power semiconductor devices , used in power systems to control the power flow and stabilize voltages .
The decentralized nature of their actions may cause deleterious interactions between one FACTS device and another , as well as between FACTS devices and generators in the system .
Currently there is a general lack of understanding as to how to systematically coordinate and stabilize system-wide dynamics via local modulation of the faster FACTS devices as well as the slower generators .
Nonlinear neurocontrollers offer a solution.This project will evaluate the initial application of neurocontrollers based on different adaptive critic designs to two different types of FACTS devices ( one at a time ) on a multi-machine power system .
An SGER form of proposal is chosen because this is preliminary work based on novel ideas , and if successful , the results will be used to generate a regular proposal which will further investigate the interactions between conventionally controlled generators and multiple neurocontrolled FACTS devices.The significance of this work lies ino Research Benefits Locally placed neurocontrolled FACTS devices can provide system wide improved voltage support and stability , thus allowing the entire power system to be operated more efficiently with a smaller stability margin.o Benefits to Society Economically operated reliable and secure power systems are of national interest .
When electricity demand exceeds available supply , it would be beneficial to produce more electrical power per installed Megawatt ( and Dollar ) of equipment , with the addition of relatively cheap intelligent neurocontrollers .
Access Science , a renewed GK-12 project , supports fellows at the University of Pennsylvania from the departments of Biology , Physics , Chemistry , Mathematics , Computer Science and Engineering , for educational activities with grade K-12 students in the urban public schools in West Philadelphia .
The school population is 98 % African American .
Penn 's Center for Community Partnership participates in the project .
Ten graduate students and twenty advanced undergraduates are supported per year .
The themes are hands-on and inquiry based science , mathematics , engineering and technology .
The nature of the schools involved result in a broad impact of this project on populations that are currently underrepresented in the sciences , technology , mathematics , and engineering professions .
This project is receiving partial support from the Directorate for Mathematics and Physical SciencesTitle GK-12 Access Science Today 's Teachers and Tomorrow 's Scientists Teaching and Learning TogetherPI Dennis DeTurckInstitution University of PennsylvaniaPartner School Districts School District of Philadelphia , West and Southwest Area OfficesNumber of Fellows/year 10 graduate ; 20 UndergraduateFunding $ 1,496,070 Total for 3 yearsGrade Bands K-12Setting UrbanDisciplines Mathematics , Biology , Chemistry , Physics , Computer Science , Engineering This proposal outlines three lines of work to build evaluation capacity .
The first line of work involves applying the techniques of principled discovery to determine the complexities of contingent intervention effects using selected EHR/STEM data sets .
The second line of work is the design of a strategy for evaluation portfolio management .
The expected result is a guide for the allocation of evaluation resources to different types of evaluation studies .
The third line of work is the development and institutionalization of effective ways to report and disseminate key evaluation findings to the press at AEA meetings .
Collectively these three activities should contribute not only to evaluation capacity , but also to research and evaluation in general .
This proposal focuses on novel approaches to teaching data structures to the Millennial Generation and on the development of tools to support them .
The project addresses the communication of key concepts in the design and analysis of data structures , which are typically taught in a course known by the acronym CS2 , as it is often the second course that a computer science student will take in their major .
This course is full of powerful ideas that have many applications , yet key concepts are not properly appreciated by many students .
This lack of enthusiasm is likely due to the fact that these concepts are often presented and justified in ways that do not resonate with the student 's prior experiences and expectations .
This project will take this historical approach and replace it with a more vibrant and visual approach that is just as rigorous and content led as the previous text-based approach , but is a better match to the way modern students learn.The components of the project are particularly focused on studying the use of multimedia , visual teaching styles , and motivating applications from society and the Internet .
A fundamental goal is to teach computer science students of the Millennial Generation how to design and utilize data structures in a way that incorporates new technologies and shows the connection between topics being taught and their potential applications .
0231743 Macauley This proposal responds to the NASA/NSF request for the study of costs and opportunities , and how to optimize them , for understanding the net impact of SSP on the biosphere and on sustainable growth .
This proposed research will model and analyze the relationship among space solar power ( SSP ) and the earth environment , energy security , and sustainable development .
It is responsive to key areas of understanding of costs and opportunities , and how to optimize them , for the net impact of SSP on the biosphere and on sustainable growth.The research will involve detailed computer-based modeling and evaluation of the economic value of SSP as a source of commercial power by the year 2020 .
The research will focus on the potential effects on the biosphere from SSP operation and the potential contribution of SSP to energy security and power supply resiliency .
Both of these factors are key determinants of the role of SSP in sustainable economic growth around the world .
To fully understand the contribution of SSP to sustainable growth , however , requires a broader economic context.Additional intellectual merits of the model will be explicit and the formal incorporation of uncertainty for all parameters , including terrestrial and SSP energy supplies , costs , biosphere and security effects , and adoption rates towards the year 2020 .
The research will result in a computer-based simulation model of the relative benefits and costs of SSP and explicit representation of energy , environmental , and security impacts .
This Small Business Innovative Research ( SBIR ) Phase I project proposes a unique rolled-ribbon cell for a Lithium-ion battery that has inherent cost advantages for a NGV FreedomCar compact pulse-power application .
It can meet the cost requirements and deliver thousands of pulses and recharges .
The battery is formed by stacking large capacity ( 5-10Ah ) , sealed , 125mm diameter , button cells to optimize power capability .
The battery design projects power at 2-4kW/kg and power density at 7.5kW/liter similar to a ultracapacitor , with 20 times greater specific energy at 70-90Wh/kg .
Of particular importance to high-power battery , the rolled-ribbon design overcomes safety concerns by its unique internal heat dissipation .
Perpendicularly oriented electrode foils remove heat from the electrode interface to the disc-cell hardware without crossing Celgard separator .
The high temperature stability of Lithium ion will be enhanced with a flame retardant electrolyte additive .
The NGV FreedomCar can anticipate a viable safe , high power Li-ion battery using the rolled-ribbon cell design , that is more compact and cost-effective than ultracapacitors or other high-power batteries .
Improved performance and temperature stability for Li-ion battery can enhance prospects for the civilian hybrid vehicle market .
Gasoline savings will reduce air pollution and oil imports .
The central idea in this proposed work is to conceptualize the nature and development of teachers ' knowledge as they , in turn , learn about how students in culturally diverse urban secondary schools negotiate the literacy demands of reform-based mathematics curricula .
We make three central claims as a rationale for this proposed work .
First , the mathematical tasks that students and teachers encounter in the reform-based secondary school curricula represent a significant shift from traditional curricula in terms of the literacy demands they make on students and teachers .
Second , students in urban settings , where literacy and mathematics achievement often lags behind achievement of students in other settings , are at great risk for not being able to meet the increased literacy demands of the reform-based curricula and of the communications standard put forward by the NCTM .
Third , secondary mathematics teachers are underprepared to mediate the intersections between mathematics and literacy .
Our driving perspective in this work will be to understand the nature of what teachers need to know to support students ' development of mathematical communication in ways that lead to effective learning of algebra and to understand how it is that this knowledge is developed among a community of urban mathematics teachers .
In this project , we will investigate these research questionsHow do teachers understand student use of the language of algebra for mathematical communication when using reform-based mathematics curricula in diverse , urban settings ? How do teachers ' understandings about the language of algebra for mathematical communication develop in ways that lead to the effective teaching of algebra ? We will use qualitative research methods to explore the sociocultural aspects of mathematics communication .
These analyses will describe the nature and development of the teachers ' learning , in the context of the students ' learning of algebra , using reform- based curricula .
We will use quantitative measures of mathematics and literacy performance to discern relative effectiveness of teachers ' instructional strategies that attend to the literacy demands of the curricula .
This study will address important theoretical issues in understanding the underlying structures of language in the acquisition of algebraic thinking and learning .
The analyses of the data on the learning and growth of teachers through an examination of the artifacts of practice will contribute to theoretical issues as well as pragmatic issues in the use of reformed-based curricula by secondary mathematics teachers .
The broader impact of this project will be ( 1 ) a model and underlying principles for how teachers acquire knowledge in areas in which they are underprepared ; ( 2 ) processes for teachers to analyze mathematical tasks and their contexts in terms of their literacy demands ; ( 3 ) principles for transforming their analyses into practice ; ( 4 ) principles for ways of using multimedia cases of practice to support teacher For engineering students in introductory system dynamics and controls courses that need to gain intuitive feel for physical systems , our distributed laboratory is a way to explore basic concepts through a hands-on experience that uses inexpensive , custom hardware and software kits .
Unlike traditional laboratory experiences , our distributed lab kit is brought home by each student and tackled on a self-paced schedule in much the same manner as a homework assignment , thus allowing each student to customize the laboratory experience to his or her learning style .
In our pilot project , lab kits whose parts cost are less than $ 100 when purchased in lot sizes of 100 will be designed and tested .
Our kits contains a controller board based on a standard microcontroller chip that implements real-time control and data acquisition software and communicates with a host over a serial port .
The systems under study will be hardware modules that connect to the controller board .
The host computer will be the student 's home PC running a Visual Basic application for experiment control .
Twenty-five kits with a motor-driven inertia hardware module , an electrical network plus speaker module and a cantilever beam module will be constructed and given to undergraduate mechanical engineering students in the beginning system dynamics course as part of their regular curriculum .
Our evaluation plan will assess project progress , views of the students and other stakeholders about the distributed lab , and the impact of the lab on student learning .
This SGER grew out of an EU-US workshop held in Venice in October , 2002 .
The intent of that workshop was to bring together researchers from the US with those from the EU who were working on similar projects related to e-work and e-business and who would like to begin to collaborate together .
This SGER will allow for US cooperation with the EU 's STAR project , which involves the conduct of dozens of case studies mapping change in a variety of industries across member states of the EU .
This project will focus on the home mortgage service sector , in particular retail financial institutions , and will bring the US and one its industries into the collection .
Case study protocols will be developed that will allow for cross-comparison with the EU case studies that have already been completed .
In addition , travel to the EU will allow for a team meeting and coordination of project goals , methods , and analysis .
These activities build upon an existing collaboration between 1998 , Yale University 's Peabody Museum of Natural History and the New Haven Public School ( NHPS ) District , the Peabody Teachers Program , a professional development program .
Participating teachers produce inquiry-based science curricula that use Peabody Museum specimens in the mobile BioAction Lab for hands-on exploration of biological diversity and its impacts on human affairs .
This draws on the expertise and materials resident in Yale 's Peabody Museum , and provides stimulating subject matter upon which basic science competencies can be developed .
The project proposed here is designed to build upon the already-existing strengths of the Peabody Teachers Program to enhance the professional development of middle school teachers and Yale graduate students , as well as to enrich the science-learning environment for New Haven middle school students .
The Fellows work closely with participating teachers throughout the year to provide technical assistance as they develop curriculum units , in part to help ensure the scientific accuracy of the content .
Working with the teachers and with children in their classrooms improves the science communication skills of the Graduate Fellows .
Training and on-site supervision of the Graduate Fellows is provided by the PIs , by the staff of the program , and by the Yale Teacher Preparation Program .
In addition , Master Peabody Teachers serve as mentors for pedagogical and classroom management techniques .
All curriculum units designed in connection with this program are being incorporated into the middle school science curriculum and will also be disseminated broadly via the Peabody Museum 's website .
All aspects of the program are overseen by an Advisory Council and a Working Committee , including evaluations of the efficacy of the program .
The broader impacts of the project affect a spectrum of beneficiaries .
Participating teachers are increasing their scientific knowledge and developing new content-rich curricula .
Their students ( 90 % minority , 50 % female , 75 % on subsidized lunch programs ) are benefiting from exposure to scientific subject matter and approaches of relevance to their daily lives , as well as to new role models .
Yale graduate students are directly exposed to educational issues at the middle school level , and to the challenges of communicating the wonder of nature and the excitement and importance of science .
This initiative strengthens Yale University 's graduate programs and its commitment to providing resources for the enhancement of science education in the local school system .
Title Yale University Graduate Teaching Fellows in Biodiversity Institution Yale University , Peabody Museum of Natural History School Partners New Haven PublicPI Michael J. Donoghue , Leonard E. MunstermannFellows/yr 4 Graduate year 1 , 6 in years 2 and 3 , 2 Undergraduate Target Middle School ( grades 4-8 ) Setting ; Urban Disciplines Biological sciences The International Materials Institute [ IMI ] at the University of Tennessee , in a strong partnership with the Oak Ridge National Laboratory , supports the international neutron-scattering community for innovative , multidisciplinary materials education and research in the area of mechanical behavior of advanced materials .
The participants include 16 universities worldwide , 7 neutron user facilities worldwide , and 8 US industries.The objectives of the IMI are to [ 1 ] develop an international network of researchers and educators who are actively involved in neutron-scattering materials research ; [ 2 ] facilitate the exchange of scientific and educational information through collaborative research and curriculum-development projects ; [ 3 ] develop a world-class work force in neutron science by providing US students , scientists , and engineers the training and access to research programs and facilities worldwide ; [ 4 ] identify and lead innovative materials-research efforts ; and [ 5 ] establish an international Internet-based virtual institute .
The core research thrust areas include [ 1 ] in-situ studies of mechanical behavior ; [ 2 ] real-time measurements of internal stresses ; [ 3 ] in-situ studies of microstructures ; and [ 4 ] theoretical modeling that complements the experimental studies.The broader impacts of the IMI activities are multi-faceted .
Most importantly , IMI will train young scientists in the cutting-edge neutron research , instilling the ability and motivation to go beyond disciplinary and regional boundaries , and integrate knowledge from multiple areas to address global problems .
Therefore , one of the major outcomes will be a world-class scientific work force in neutron science with a unique education and research background .
% % % The International Materials Institute [ IMI ] at the University of Tennessee , in a strong partnership with the Oak Ridge National Laboratory [ ORNL ] , supports an international neutron-scattering community for innovative , multidisciplinary materials education and research in the area of mechanical behavior of advanced materials .
Neutron scattering is one of the most powerful characterization techniques available for materials research , and its proven capabilities and anticipated potential justify the 1.4 billion dollar construction of the Spallation Neutron Source [ SNS ] at ORNL as well as a number of multi-million dollar facility upgrades at the Los Alamos Neutron Science Center [ LANSCE ] , New Mexico , Intense Pulsed Neutron Source [ IPNS ] , Illinois , and High Flux Isotope Reactor [ HFIR ] , Tennessee .
The international competition is fierce in the neutron-science arena , e.g. , the European Union [ EU ] , Japan , China , and Australia are also currently building or designing the next-generation neutron sources .
Through the IMI , a group of the most active researchers in the neutron-scattering materials research field will form an international network to provide a synergistic effort in advancing the science , education , and training on the application of neutron scattering in materials research , specifically regarding the study of mechanical behavior of advanced materials .
The main goals of the proposed IMI are to [ 1 ] accomplish the national agenda of advancing neutron science in the US to the leadership position in the world by providing international cooperative education and research opportunities to the neutron-scattering materials research community , and [ 2 ] train young scientists at the undergraduate , graduate , and postgraduate levels to fully utilize the neutron facilities worldwide for dramatically expanding the development of new materials , and thereby , establish a global leadership in the neutron-science arena .
This project would develop a twenty-credit certificate program in evaluation that students could complete in 9 months to1 year .
In addition to regular course work in evaluation , this certificate program would include a practicum to give students the opportunity to work directly on evaluation projects .
Students would be recruited from the surrounding area , which has large minority populations .
It is expected that many students would be employees of State and Federal government agencies in the region and letters of support from many of these agencies were included .
There are no other certificate programs in evaluation known to exist at this time .
9875544LinThe aim of this research is to develop for the area of solid state materials chemistry a rational synthesis of acentric and chiral polymeric coordination networks using metal-ligand coordination as the molecular basis for the construction .
Three novel aproaches will be examined ( 1 ) crystal engineering of acentric interpenetrated diamonoid networks ; ( 2 ) design of acentric and chiral two-dimensional square grids based on metal pyridinecarboxalates ; ( 3 ) synthesis of acentric , pillared two-dimensional sheets of basic trinuclear carboxalates with three-fold rotational symmetry .
The educational aims will focus on curriculum development , the encouragement of underrespresented groups to become scientists and engineers , the involvment of undergraduate and summer high school students in research , and public outreach that emphasizes environmental issues. % % % Crystal engineering of organic solids via non-covalent bonding such as hydrogen bonding is emerging as a very important area in the design , synthesis , and materials property optimization for nonlinear optical device materials , and for the development of novel chiral zeolytic materials for separations processes employed in the protection and conservation of the environment .
*** Not Available 0202631WrightThe International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad .
The program 's awards provide opportunities for joint research , and the use of unique or complementary facilities , expertise and experimental conditions abroad.This award will support a twelve month research fellowship by Dr. Daniel Wright to work with Dr. Joseph Zyss at the L'Ecole Normale Superieure de Cachan in Cachon , France .
This project will be co-supported by the Math and Physical Sciences Directorate 's Office of Multidisciplinary Activities.This project will advance research on organic microlasers in the lab of Dr. Joseph Zyss at the L'Ecole Normale Superieure de Cachan .
The research will be directed in two areas , one focusing on the laser gain media and the other on the laser feedback structure .
The work on the gain media will concentrate on the development of organic microlasers that operate in the near infrared portion of the spectrum at the industrially useful wavelengths of 1.3 and 1.55 um since there are currently no organic laser sources that work at these wavelengths .
The project will entail the examination of new polymers doped with rare-earth ions that could provide efficient laser light in this spectra region .
The PI 's work on microlaser cavity design will focus on improving the directionality of the emissions of these devices by fabricating organic microdisk structures with engineered defects and also exploring other planar cavity shapes such as ovals , mulipoles , and polygons .
He will subsequently investigate the coupling of these planar cavities to optical fibers , waveguides , and other microdisks .
In order to characterize and improve the feedback structures , he will perform experiments in which the emitted light of each new cavity will be collected such that the angular dependence and spectral properties of the light can be examined .
The results of these experiments will be compared to mathematical models of the systems under study.Dr .
Zyss is one of the leading researchers in organic non-linear optics and photonics .
EIA 02-02007Das , Chita R.Acharya , Raj ; Giles , C. L. ; Irwin , Mary Jane ; Plassman , Paul E.Pennsylvania State University ( I^3\ ) C An Infrastructure for Innovation in Information Computing This proposal , advancing the state-of-the-art in cluster computing , addresses a broad spectrum of interactive and archival information processing issues that require intensive computational capabilities .
A high performance compute-engine ( clusters ) , the Access Net , Storage Network ( file and database server ) , and a Media Lab ( multimedia and graphics equipment , workstations , laptops , PDAs , and software ) comprise the infrastructure that will support the following three core areas , with respective research activities1 .
Applicationsa .
Computational Scienceb .
Digital Immortalityc .
Bioinformatics2 .
System Softwarea .
Cluster Schedulingb .
Shared I/O Supportc .
Fault Tolerance3 .
Architecturea .
QoS Support for Multimedia and E-Commerce Applications in Clustered-Serversb .
Design of Energy-Efficient Hardware and Software Optimizationsc .
Energy Perspective Optimization of Different Layers of the Wireless Protocol Stack The project focuses on three application areas ( Computational Science , Digital Immortality , and Bioinformatics ) to examine common research issues , which in turn drive the Software and Architecture research for providing holistic solutions to challenging problems .
A research team , consisting of 25 investigators from three different colleges , will benefit from this infrastructure by strengthening their interdisciplinary research through cross-fertilization of new ideas .
In the Appalachian region of southwest Virginia , geographic barriers often prohibit travel to educational centers , thus limiting the region 's ability to assist in meeting the growing need for information technology workers .
Further complicating the ability to train qualified IT workers has been the traditional difficulty of transferring AAS credits from a community college to institutions granting baccalaureate degrees.This project joins 11 community colleges from the Appalachian region of southwest Virginia with Radford University to form a Regional Technology Education Consortium ( RTEC ) .
RTEC is designed to ( 1 ) provide a clear path for AAS students to attain a Baccalaureate degree in computer science or information systems ; ( 2 ) develop curriculum to meet the technology competency requirements of the information technology industry ; ( 3 ) insure that articulated programs meet industry certification standards and recommended guidelines from professional associations and ; and ( 4 ) institutionalize procedures and organizational structures to guarantee continued congruence between the community college and 4-year university curricula in information technology.To further enhance success , RTEC is expanding business and industry partnerships to improve the congruence between needs of employers and the institutions preparing future IT workers .
Radford University 's Business and Industry Council has a committee assigned to advise the College of Information Science and Technology .
Business and Industry Council members , including representatives from SunTrust Bank , First Union National Bank , EDS Corporation , Science Applications International Corporation ( SAIC ) , First Virtual Corporation , Polycom Network Systems , Verizon Communications , and SAP provide significant input from an employer 's perspective .
The dynamic partnership of RTEC combined with the collaborative efforts of the information technology industry is energizing and broadening the technology-based learning experiences available to AAS graduates in the Appalachian communities throughout southwestern Virginia .
The demand for the next generation of information technology professionals is being met by incorporating industry needs with academic preparation .
Mathematical Sciences Fellowships 0202732GoetzThe International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad .
The program 's awards provide opportunities for joint research , and the use of unique or complementary facilities , expertise and experimental conditions abroad.This award will support a seven month research fellowship by Dr. Arek J. Goetz to work with Dr. Pierre Arnoux at the University of Marseille in France.Dr .
Goetz will join a group of active researchers at the University of Marseille II , Institut de Luminy , and the Center of Theoretical Physics , in research pertaining to the dynamics of transformations with low symbolic complexity .
In particular , he will explore the relationship between the symbolic dynamics induced by invertible piecewise rotations , the geometry and fractal structure of the coding partition .
The last month of the fellowship will be spent at the University of Exeter in the UK where he will join a team of researchers in dynamical systems led by Dr. Peter Ashwin and apply results from the theory of piecewise isometries to electrical engineering , in particular to the theory of digital filters .
Digital filters are computer algorithms used currently in electronic devices such as cell phone and voice and image recognition devices .
The September 11 , 2001 terrorist attack on the World Trade Center ( WTC ) in New York City was a traumatic event of unparalleled magnitude .
In addition to the thousands who perished in the attack , literally tens of thousands of others were directly and without warning exposed to grave danger as they fled the buildings .
Still others not in immediate physical danger nonetheless were forced to watch in horror as people jumped from the towers , or were engulfed by debris .
Such images and experiences will undoubtedly leave thousands vulnerable for Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder ( PTSD ) .
Yet , based on past research , it can be anticipated that many of the individuals directly exposed to the WTC attack will recover their equilibrium and return to normal functioning within a month or two after the event .
The goal of this small grant for exploratory research is to understand this remarkable resilience .
In two previous studies , the principal investigator and his colleagues found that individuals disposed toward self-enhancement were better able to cope with extremely adverse conditions .
The current study is designed to explore whether self-enhancing individuals who were directly exposed to the WTC attack ( i.e. , in or near the WTC and either in immediate danger or witnessed horrific sights ) might cope better than other individuals .
The relationship between self-enhancement and long-term adjustment will be examined using multiple measures , including a biological marker of stress reactions and ratings of participant 's adjustment provided by close friends and family members .
In addition , this study will further explore the social cost of self-enhancement and how it relates to overall adjustment and well being by including a wider range of measures of social relations than had been used in previous research .
Finally , the study will examine how survivors of the WTC attack experience express emotions when they talk about their experiences on September 11 .
These data will help determine whether self-enhancers process emotions differently than other individuals and , if so , whether these differences hold the key to their unusual ability to cope with extreme adversity .
Not Available Advances in research and operational weather observation systems and numerical modeling techniques have led to progressive improvements in understanding of physical processes involved in the development and evolution of lake-effect snow storms .
In particular recent observations taken during the Lake-Induced Convection Experiment ( Lake-ICE ) and mesoscale numerical models have been utilized to better understand isolated classic lake-effect systems that develop primarily from lake surface heat and moisture fluxes in fall and winter months .
The enhanced scientific understanding of interactions between microscale and mesoscale processes in classic lake-effect systems can now be applied to more complex , and perhaps more common and intense , non-classic lake-effect storms.This collaborative research project will build on past research results and use new observations and numerical models to develop a physically-consistent understanding of complex interactions of synoptic systems and mesoscale lake-effect systems and factors controlling the coherence of , and structure along , mesoscale lake-effect convective bands .
In particular the Principal Investigators will analyze data obtained from radars , aircraft , satellites and surface instrumentation and perform detailed mesoscale model simulations to study unresolved issues for non-classic lake-effect situations .
Four specific research objectives are to 1 ) Determine differences in the cloud microphysical structure and thermodynamics of lake-effect boundary layers that occur with and without large-scale precipitation aloft ; 2 ) Determine the effects of a warm lake on the mesoscale dynamics and structure of moving mesoscale precipitation systems ( such as associated with synoptic fronts ) ; 3 ) Determine the processes by which the convective boundary layer and mesoscale circulations from an upwind lake influence lake-effect development over a downwind lake ; 4 ) Determine the dynamic mechanisms leading to the development of mesoscale structures along lake-effect snow bands and the influence of vertical wind shear on band structural coherence .
Successful completion of this research could help improve the forecast of intense lake-effect snowstorms .
0202468Chuang Knowledge of molecular interactions/alignment and their relations to friction between two contacting , moving surfaces are becoming important as the scale of mechanical engineering devices continues to shrink to microscopic and eventually nanoscopic scales .
A lack of in situ techniques to monitor molecular interactions/alignment not only presents a challenge to understand the molecular origin of friction but also hinders the development of novel lubrication systems to minimize friction and wear .
This exploratory research project proposes the development of an in situ infrared spectroscopic technique to characterize molecular interactions/alignment between two contacting , moving surfaces under working conditions with simultaneous friction measurement .
The contacting surfaces will be grafted with organic molecules containing with CF3 , phosphate , alkyl , aryl , ether and COOH groups .
These various types of molecular surfaces allow investigation of the role of van der Walls forces , hydrophobic/hydrophilic interactions , polar functional groups , and electrostatic interactions in friction .
Changes in intra- and intermolecular interactions , molecular conformation , packing , and alignment during friction measurement will be determined by the shift in molecular vibrational frequencies .
This work is expected to develop a fundamental understanding of ghe friction on the moving surfaces with the well-defined molecular arrangement .
This understanding coupled with the molecular grafting approach will provide a technical basis for the development of permanent , ultra low-friction coatings for moving surfaces .
This type of liquid-free lubrication will provide a contaminant-free environment and eliminate the need for oil ( i.e. , lubricant ) change .
The results of this proposed study could have a far-reaching impact on the design of nanostructured surfaces for controlling friction for meso- , micro- , and macroscopic moving devices ranging from MEMS devices , artificial joints , bearings , to gears .
The Louisville Area Science and Mathematics Alliance for Recruitment and Teacher Education Reform ( LA-SMARTER ) brings together the University of Louisville ( U of L ) , Jefferson County Public Schools ( JCPS ) and 10 school districts of the Ohio Valley Educational Cooperative ( OVEC ) .
Its goal is to ensure that the Louisville area has an adequate number of qualified and certified middle and high school teachers of mathematics and science over the next decade .
To meet this general goal , LA-SMARTER is building a model teacher education program in mathematics and science education with an accessible alternative certification option ; Preparing at least 50 certified middle and high school mathematics and science teachers in the greater Louisville area in the next three years ; and Building a support system in four schools for prospective and new teachers that extends beyond preparation and induction experiences .
In support of these objectives , LA-SMARTER is ( a ) enriching mathematics and science courses in the teacher education program ; ( b ) establishing an accessible alternative certification program for non-traditional students ; ( c ) implementing an aggressive recruitment plan ; and ( d ) creating a support system for new teachers that ensures retention in teaching beyond five years .
The Alliance is using teams of mathematicians , scientists , mathematics and science educators , and exemplary middle and high school teachers to develop four mathematics and science courses that help prospective teachers develop a deep understanding of the content that they will teach .
It has established and is supporting professional development teams ( PDTs ) in two middle schools and two high schools .
These teams are comprised of a mathematics or science educator , all teachers in the mathematics or science departments , and a group of three or more student teachers in mathematics and science .
Mathematicians and scientists will work with PDTs as needed .
The Alliance employs a full-time faculty member in the College of Arts and Sciences to recruit and advise students and coordinate courses .
This faculty member is recruiting into both traditional and alternative certification programs , focusing on students majoring in biology , chemistry , geology , mathematics , and physics and students who have withdrawn from the College of Engineering .
Also LA-SMARTER has established a team of staff members from partner schools and the University to develop and distribute print materials explaining the certification programs in mathematics and science , and to actively recruit persons in mathematics and science teaching .
This project is also recruiting and creating a pool of emergency-certified teachers that subsequently complete a one- or two-year alternative certification program in middle or high school mathematics or science .
Graduate Alliance for Education in LouisianaPROJECT SUMMARYWe propose to establish an alliance for increasing diversity in graduate education and the professoriate in Louisiana .
Alliance partners will include Tulane and Louisiana State University ( the two Carnegie Research I universities in the state and the institutions responsible for 94 % of the minority doctoral degree production in the state between 1994-2001 ) , Xavier University of Louisiana , Dillard University , and Southern University Baton Rouge and New Orleans .
The Graduate Alliance for Education in Louisiana ( GAELA ) will build upon existing minority SME research training programs at these institutions , and develop new programs to encourage more minority students to pursue SME graduate education and academic careers .
One of the goals of the GAELA project will be the early identification and nurturing of promising students during their undergraduate years .
A concerted effort will be made to recruit doctoral fellows from participants in LS-LAMP , the College Fund - Xavier AMP , and other pre-graduate training programs in the state .
We expect that the nurturing students receive in these programs , and the familiarity they gain working with faculty at Tulane and LSU will increase their chances of successfully completing their doctoral training.The second major goal of the GAELA Program will be to affect significant change in the culture of graduate education at the State of Louisiana 's top research universities in order to significantly increase minority SME doctoral degree production .
We have set a numerical goal of 45 Ph.D. per year by 2006 , more than triple the 2001 annual output on minority doctoral degrees .
The project has a strong component of recruitment and early exposure of students to academic career opportunities focused on participating HBCU 's , and a variety of retention activities focused on the two graduate research institutions.The recruitment component consists of exposing students at HBCU 's to study and academic career opportunities at LSU and Tulane through recruiting visits by LSU and Tulane faculty , annual recruitment fairs on Tulane and LSU campuses , and involving HBCU students in Tulane/LSU faculty-mentored research .
We will establish GAELA campus programs at Xavier , Dillard , SUBR and SUNO to coordinate these activities .
The retention component will consist of mentoring workshops for Tulane and LSU faculty , awarding research funds and professional travel grants to doctoral students that are making satisfactory progress toward completing their degrees , SME academic career training sessions , and # I survival sessions for helping minority students cope with the majority graduate educational environment .
MODULAR TOWERS AND THE IGP OVER THE RATIONALS Often researchers usealgebraic relations in two variables x and y over a field to describesignificant data .
Some examples are sets of values x having an ( x , y ) with entries in the field that satisfy the relation .
One of these is theDavenport 's problem of determining equivalence classes of polynomialsaccording to their value sets over finite fields .
Describing complexmultiplication fields , generated by those x with ( x , y ) a specialelliptic curve torsion point , is a variant .
A relation with a datavariable x produces a permutation group G The Galois group .
Theinvestigator treats these as cases of the Inverse GaloisProblem ( IGP ) .
One goal is to decide , from certain listsof relations , if some have the rational numbers as definition field.Serious group theory helped solve Davenport 's 1965 problem and Schur'sexceptional polynomial problem ( 1919 ; see below ) .
Further , modularcurves reveal complex multiplication to be a version of Schur'sproblem .
Having command of all finite simple groups has manyapplications .
One is to list those groups attached to exceptionalpolynomials .
Knowing many characters of Chevalley groups showed Thompsonand Voelklein where to find series of solutions to the IGP .
Yet , it willrequire more than massive group theory to solve the whole IGP .
Theinvestigator uses Modular Towers , a modular curve generalization , tofinesse unknowable group classifications .
He and his students let aknown group G , and a prime p dividing the order of G , seed the base levelof a Modular Tower .
Higher tower levels code relations with mysteriousgroups covering G related to p. Coherent maps between the tower levelsreplace details on these intricate covering groups .
Work of Y. Ihara andJ.P .
Serre inspire showing that Modular Towers has many properties oftheir special , modular curve , case .
For example , high tower levels for aG with no Z/p quotient should have no rational points .
For certain groups G , and the prime p=2 , this extends Serre 's program on spin structures .
The investigator applies new spin-like structures to all cases when p is 2 and to all primes p. PRACTICAL CRYPTOGRAPHY AND IGP OVER FINITE FIELDS Modern cryptosystemsaim to secure electronic transfers of data .
Exceptional functions act aspermutations on infinitely many finite fields .
A special case of theInverse Galois Problem over finite fields asks how to constructexceptional functions .
These scrambling functions look simple .
Users caneasily apply them ( up to 1993 , all came from the 19th century ) .
Still , finding them has been difficult .
Fried ( UCI ) , Guralnick ( USC ) and Saxl ( Cambridge ) nearly classify them .
This solves old problems ( Dickson 1896and Carlitz 1965 ) .
They also produce unexpected new examples .
Their bestdiscovery is that exceptional polyomial Galois groups ( excluding nowwell-understood cases ) have the affine geometric property .
This isuseful for it gives the degrees of exceptional polynomials .
Yet , it isalso a difficult challenge There can be no final description of allaffine groups .
The investigator with A. Mezard approaches affine groupsby generalizing to all algebraic relations over finite fieldsGrothendieck 's famous results for tame relations .
Applications forexceptional functions alone include ways to manipulate data forencryption and to assure integrity .
This will mean faster , moreefficient and accurate file back-ups ; more stable software ; and moresecure data transfers .
Mathematical Sciences Fellowship Not Available As a result of a 1998 critical needs analysis , the faculty of Mount Wachusett Community College ( MWCC ) , Gardner , Massachusetts , applied for and received a grant from the National Science Foundation ( ATE Award No .
9850317 ) .
Under this project faculty developed an educational program for woodworking technicians , employing a unique combination of educational videos , classroom and in-plant instruction utilizing a Corps of Craftsman .
The latest efforts build on this work to further develop and implement a national model offering distance-learning courses to industry professionals or students in existing woodworking training programs .
Through this program , students earn a wood technician certificate which is applied towards an associate degree in wood products technology .
MWCC is completing the development of and is offering the full associate degree program for woodworking technicians on a distance-learning basis in conjunction with an ongoing Winrock International apprenticeship program in Arkansas .
Once their full program is underway in Arkansas , it will be expanded to at least one other state during the project period .
The intent is to eventually use the Arkansas program as a national model .
Courses are being offered through a unique combination of distance-learning and classroom instruction .
The Corps of Craftsmen , consisting of both retired and non-retired personnel , was established as part of the initial NSF project .
These craftpersons also assist in some of the hands-on educational instruction of the program .
The course materials developed for the education of apprentices in Arkansas are also being used for a project currently underway in Washington , D.C. MWCC faculty are working in Washington , D.C. to train a diverse group of inner-city youths in woodworking , with partial support from their previous NSF grant .
Ongoing participation of these youths in the project enhances their opportunities for learning .
Another unique component of their program involves the inclusion of an industry trade magazine .
Non-credit and for-credit course modules ( portions of full courses ) are being administered in cooperation with Wood Digest magazine on a national level .
A major strength of their project is the involvement of several public and private organizations .
DMS Award AbstractAward # 0202767PI Friedlander , SusanInstitution University of Illinois , ChicagoProgram Applied MathematicsProgram Manager Catherine MavriplisTitle Topics in Mathematical Fluid DynamicsThis project uses a variety of techniques in nonlinear partial differential equations to study several different open questions connected with the equations that describe the motion of a fluid , namely the Euler and the Navier-Stokes equations .
Stability of a fluid flow is one of the most basic problems in fluid dynamics stable flows are robust under the inevitable disturbances in the environment , while unstable flows may break up , sometimes rapidly .
The investigator will continue to explore the relations between different types of instability with the goal of defining scales or degrees of instability .
Sufficient conditions are sought to demonstrate nonlinear instability for classes of inviscid fluids .
Another topic studied in the project is the equation for a viscous fluid when there is a nonlinear relation between the stress and strain tensors ( a so-called non-Newtonian fluid ) .
A fundamental mathematical question asked for any of the fluid equations is the possibility of the development of singularities in finite time .
Motivated by results from a dyadic model for the non-Newtonian equations , the investigator and collaborators use techniques of wavelets and Littlewood -Paley theory to give an upper bound on the dimension of the singular set in the case of the Navier Stokes equations with nonlinear viscosity .
The greater portion of our world is composed of fluids e.g. , the atmosphere , the oceans , even our own bodies .
However fluids behave in very complex ways that are presently understood only to a very minor degree .
This project uses rigorous mathematics to examine several questions that are fundamantal to the nature of fluid motion .
These include the stability or instability of a fluid configuration .
In the view of many scientists , waves and instabilities lie at the heart of long term weather prediction with all its practical implications for global change and the world economy .
Another topic under investigation concerns fluids with a nonlinear viscous force relation .
This happens , for example , in models for turbulent eddies and also in fluids with a special molecular structure such a blood or some polymers .
The investigator seeks to bound the development of singularities ( e.g .
infinite energy spikes ) in the motion of such fluids .
Date April 26 , 2002 A large part of Professor Lyubeznik 's research on local cohomologyover the last decade has been devoted to the study of a number of strikingconnections with several quite diverse areas of mathematics , such as etalecohomology , topology of algebraic varieties , D-modules and others includingthe theory of tight closure and cohomology of groups .
Professor Lyubeznik is going to continue to study these ( and some other ) questions by using methods that have been successful in the past as well as developing some new methods.It is always fascinating when a connection is discovered between two very different fields of mathematics because it can result in unexpected and significant discoveries inaccessible by the methods of only one of those two fields .
This project is in the areas of mathematics known as Abstract Algebra and Algebraic Geometry , with connections to Topology .
Abstract Algebra is a vast generalization of high school or college algebra , think of it as the algebra of many simultaneous polynomial equations in many variables .
Algebraic Geometry gives a way of studying the solutions to such a system of equations as a geometric object .
Topology is the study of those properties of geometric objects that do n't change when the object is stretched or twisted , as if it were made of rubber .
Over the last decade local cohomology , an algebraic tool used in all three areas , has been shown to have some striking connections with a number of very different areas , including differential equations and others .
These connections are mutually beneficial .
For example , D-modules , an algebraic version of differential equations , has helped establish some important algebraic properties of local cohomology , while local cohomology has helped prove some striking topological results .
Even thoughconsiderable progress on this circle of ideas has been made , muchremains to be done .
0202514KayeThe International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad .
The program 's awards provide opportunities for joint research , and the use of unique or complementary facilities , expertise and experimental conditions abroad.This award will support a six-month research fellowship by Dr. Jason Kaye to work with Dr. Ramon Vallejo at the Centro de Estudios Ambientales del Mediterraneo ( CEAM ) in Valencia , Spain over a period of 36 months.The objective of this project is to quantify the effects of fire and fire management on carbon storage in eastern Spain and the southwestern United States .
Both of these regions contain dry forests that supported frequent fires prior to human management ( millennia ago in Spain , a century ago in the U.S. ) .
Contemporary fire suppression facilitates tree establishment , carbon storage , and fuel accumulation .
In Spain , this accumulated fuel eventually burns in stand-replacing fires that convert plant material to atmospheric CO2 .
In the U.S. , fire suppression is more effective and most forests have not burned for a century .
Thus , these regions contain complementary information regarding fire-based CO2 emissions .
The Spanish ecosystems provide information on CO2 released from forests experiencing repeated stand-replacing fires .
The U.S. ecosystems provide information on CO2 stored in forests when fire is persistently suppressed .
To measure carbon accumulation following stand-replacing fires in eastern Spain , the PI will locate forests that have burned at different times in the past and measure the total amount of carbon in each ecosystem .
The rate of carbon accumulation can be calculated from the age and carbon content of each forest .
To measure carbon accumulation following fire suppression in the U.S. , the PI will use tree-ring reconstructions of past forest density and mass .
Tree-rings represent an annual record of tree size that can be converted into carbon storage .
The main results from this research will be equations describing the accumulation of carbon in dry forests following fire suppression and stand replacing fires .
These equations will rapidly be incorporated into global carbon models.Dr .
Vallejo has been studying fire in this region for 25 years .
He has on-going projects with researchers in the European Union , which will enable interactions with international carbon and fire scientists .
Dr. Vallejo has already established research sites that are ideally suited for the carbon sampling outlined above .
Not Available ABSTRACT DMS - 0202796 .
PI Dan KnopfMy research centers on geometric evolutionequations , notably the Ricci flow and related curvature flows .
I planto study seven areas in which I have obtained prior results , and wherecontinued work is likely to yield new and useful mathematics .
[ 1 ] When a flow converges , it is valuable to study the stability of its limit , inorder to improve our global understanding of the dynamics of flows .
[ 2 ] Ifa flow fails to converge but behaves in a nonsingular way , one can stillstudy the dynamics of this collapse by classifying the asymptotic behaviorof nearby solutions .
[ 3 ] In most cases , a flow does become singular ; so itis of paramount importance ( particularly in regard to Hamilton 's programto resolve Thurston 's Geometrization Conjecture ) to develop a betterclassification of singularities .
[ 4 ] The basic method of studyingsingularities is the construction of a sequence of parabolic dilations ( blow-ups ) .
To take limits of these solutions , one must obtain ( partial ) injectivity radius estimates by various means .
[ 5 ] The most powerful ( butperhaps most difficult ) way to obtain such injectivity radius estimateswould be to study and extend existing Harnack estimates of the typepioneered by Li and Yau and further developed by Hamilton .
[ 6 ] It is also useful to study the asymptotic behavior and stability of parabolicdilations at certain model singularities ( a method which has been veryfruitful in studying the mean curvature flow ) .
[ 7 ] Further informationabout singularities can be obtained by constructing and studying solitonsself-similar solutions that often arise as limits of blow-ups .
Moreover , Kaehler Ricci solitons have interesting connections with complex geometryand algebraic geometry.Geometric evolution studies the way anobject 's shape changes .
In some cases , such as the mean curvature flow andporous media flow , the motivation is to model certain physical phenomenasuch as the motion of an interface in forming metallic alloys , the shapeof a thin film of highly viscous oil , or the flow of oil in shale .
Inother cases , the goal is to improve the shape of an object , either to findoptimal ( most efficient ) shapes , or else to help mathematicians recognizeand classify geometric objects .
My own research is part of a large programto resolve one of the most compelling open questions in mathematics thedesire to understand and classify all possible 3-dimensional shapes .
Butregardless of whether their motivation comes from material science or puremathematics , all geometric evolution problems have much in common ; so thatthe field benefits from rich cross-fertilization .
In particular , ideas andtechniques that are developed for any of these highly nonlinear problemsare usually quickly adaptable to related applications .
This is a contract .
0202581BraswellThe International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad .
The program 's awards provide opportunities for joint research , and the use of unique or complementary facilities , expertise and experimental conditions abroad.This award will support a twenty-one month research fellowship by Dr. Geoffrey E. Braswell to work with Dr. Jaime Awe at the Department of Archaeology at the Ministry of Tourism in Belmopan , Belize.This project will involve the gathering of data to test two contrasting hypotheses about weakly and strongly integrated Classic Mayan states .
The Pis will work on a program of archaeological investigation , preservation , and consolidation at the ancient Maya city of Pusilha , Belize in Central America .
Pusilha is a mid-size population and political center located in the extreme southwest of Belize .
The site is known for its many carved monuments dating to AD 573-751 and for a unique engineering feature an ancient triple-span bridge over the Pusilha ( Machaca ) River and two artificial diversion canals .
Dr .
Awe is the Archaeological Coordinator of the Ministry of Tourism 's Development Project .
As a fellow under Dr .
Awe , Dr. Braswell will learn the archaeological and engineering techniques used to consolidate ancient monuments .
They will test specific centralist and decentralist hypotheses regarding the horizontal and hierarchical integration of ancient Maya economy against a historical-political framework derived from monumental texts of Pusilha .
Their research will contribute new and refine existing models of organization , stability , and change in Maya society , and - by extension - will be of relevance to the study of archaic states throughout the world .
Not Available 0202704ParkerThe International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad .
The program 's awards provide opportunities for joint research , and the use of unique or complementary facilities , expertise and experimental conditions abroad.This award will support a twenty-four month research fellowship by Dr. Timothy H. Parker to work with Dr. Benjamin C. Sheldon at the University of Oxford in the United Kingdom.Bird song is one of the most ubiquitous sounds in nature .
In many species , song may act to attract mates , but this possibility has not been well studied .
Studying animal behaviors , such as bird song , is important both to our basic knowledge of nature and to our ability to address applied problems of conservation and species management .
This project breaks new ground by 1 ) using experimental manipulations to determine the causes of variation in songs among individuals within a species and 2 ) integrating the results of the song study with the collaborators ' ongoing study of visual ( feather ) signals and mate attraction in the same population .
Thus , this will be the most comprehensive study to date of the relative condition dependence and signaling roles of multiple signals ( song and bright feathers ) within a single species .
The PI and his collaborators will manipulate brood size ( add or remove chicks from nests ) in a common European bird .
This manipulates the provisioning demands on the parents and the food delivered per chick and is thus a proven method for increasing or decreasing condition in both parents and offspring .
In the year subsequent to brood manipulations , the PI will record the songs of the fathers of manipulated broods , and the songs of returning males who were reared in manipulated broods .
This will be a uniquely thorough assessment of the degree to which different song components contain different information about their bearer 's condition .
If signal expression ( i.e. , song ) is condition dependent , theory predicts that it can be useful in intra-specific communication .
The PI will assess the importance of different aspects of song in determining male access to females and male success in holding a territory .
Once again , song and plumage data will be integrated to generate a comprehensive picture of the function of sexual signals in the study species.In addition to Dr. Sheldon , the PI will collaborate with Dr. Simon Griffith .
Both of researchers have been involved in some of the most important avian sexual selection research in recent years .
The host department is one of the leading institutions in the world for the study of avian field ecology , with a tradition of innovative research extending back over a half a century .
This award by the Inorganic , Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program supports research by Professor Carl J. Carrano at Southwest Texas State University to study a family of ligands that allows for the systematic variance of donor atom , charge , steric bulk , hydrogen-bonding and other factors that can have an important effect on metal-catalyzed biotransformations .
Ligand effects on oxygen atom transfer reactions between acceptors such as organophosphines and models for molybdoenzymes will be systematically studied .
New sulfur-rich model complexes to more closely mimic enzyme active sites will be prepared .
Pentaacoordinate complexes of iron will be prepared as models for several non-heme iron oxygenase enzymes in order to determine the effects of the donor atom set , charge , and hydrogen bonding and other factors that control oxygenation versus oxidation .
Pseudotetrahedral iron complexes will be synthesized and studied as models for peptide deformylases and compared with analogous complexes of Co ( II ) , Ni ( II ) and Zn ( II ) in order to determine why Fe ( II ) rather than Zn ( II ) is employed by nature in these unique hydrolytic enzymes.Relatively small complexes of metal ions will be prepared that simulate the structure and function of metal active sites in enzymes .
Studying these complexes will help to elucidate the fundamental nature of the function of the metal ions in a number of important enzymes .
Florence-Darlington Technical College and Piedmont Technical College are collaboratively serving as a national Resource Center for dissemination of educational materials , curricula , pedagogical practice , and recruitment strategies resulting from the highly successful South Carolina Advanced Technological Education Center of Excellence ( SC ATE ) .
As a national Resource Center for Excellence in engineering technology education , this partnership serves as a highly visible resource for ideas , materials , contacts , and mentoring focused on recruiting , nurturing , and teaching students at the beginning of the engineering technology educational pipeline where most attrition occurs .
The institutions involved were an integral part of the SC ATE Center of Excellence work for the past six years , and the envisioned systemic reform has taken root .
They have the largest number of SC ATE-prepared , reform-ready faculty and the most experience in implementing the SC ATE curricula and fostering numerous other improvements in the teaching/learning environment .
These two colleges are carrying this significant statewide work from a base of experience and success in South Carolina to the next level to benefit the greater two-year technical and community college engineering technology ( ET ) community .
The vision of the project is to serve as a national model and clearinghouse to increase the quantity , quality and diversity of engineering technology graduates from two-year ET degree programs .
The goals of the project are to ( a ) Serve as a national focal point for improvement in ET education ; ( b ) Refine and share successful SC ATE recruitment strategies ( e.g. , ATE Scholars ) and share new recruitment strategies ; ( c ) Refine and share the SC ATE Technology Gateway ( pre-engineering technology ) curriculum ( three courses ) and the SC ATE Engineering Technology Core curriculum , ET Core ; ( d ) Develop multiple course and curriculum scheduling options to increase use of the SC ATE curricula ; ( e ) Introduce a pilot electronic version of Technology Gateway to facilitate greater access to ET programs for students for whom a full-time or an uninterrupted course of study is not possible ; ( f ) Share insights into organizational change issues that can support or hinder lasting improvement in the teaching/learning environment for engineering technology students ; ( g ) Deliver a pilot version of ATE Teaching Team Training via an interactive web-based workshop ; ( h ) Leverage the experience of SC ATE 's principal investigators , college administrators , and faculty by providing mentoring for others as they adapt and implement SC ATE models or otherwise address the special needs of beginning engineering technology students ; and , ( i ) Demonstrate how the processes of project evaluation , program evaluation , and accreditation can be linked to implement total quality improvement in the preparation of students for successful careers in engineering technology and beyond .
This project formulates a strategic plan for the development of the national center for pulp and paper technology through the partnership of the four two-year colleges and with strong backing and support from industry .
The center is going to establish and perpetuate a technology program and network providing students around the nation an effective education and training program .
The center is also going to provide the pulp and paper sector of the U. S. forest products industry with a globally competitive , technologically advanced workforce .
Alabama Southern Community College ( ASCC ) and Auburn University alliance continues in this project with the addition of four two-year colleges strategically located throughout the United States .
These institutions include ( 1 ) Kennebec Valley Technical College , a rural college in Fairfield , Maine , ( 2 ) Fox Valley Technical College in a more urban area in Appleton , Wisconsin , ( 3 ) Century Community Technical College in White Bear Lake , Minnesota , and ( 4 ) Lower Columbia College in a more urban area in Longview , Washington.The project includes participation of several national pulp and paper industry organizations under an industry-academia-governmental initiative called Agenda 2020 .
These national organizations consist of ( 1 ) The American Forest and Paper Association ( AF & PA ) , ( 2 ) The Technical Association of the Pulp and Paper Industry ( TAPPI ) , and ( 3 ) The Paper , Allied-Industrial , Chemical & Energy Workers International Union ( PACE ) .
This initiative enables focusing the industry 's technology vision , sets the industry 's technology agenda , and provides science and technology foundation for the industry .
A major focus of Agenda 2020 is the development of a technologically advanced workforce ( TAW ) to operate and maintain the new technologies of today , and more importantly , in the coming years .
The planning for this center is going to closely coordinate the workforce development needs of today and in the future as new and sophisticated technology is ushered in for purposes of efficiency and quality improvement so that our nation 's pulp and paper industries can successfully compete internationally .
The overall goal of this project is to establish a Consortium for Education in Renewable Energy Technologies ( CERET ) to facilitate implementation of a broad-based interdisciplinary approach to technical education in renewable energy technologies .
This goal supports the vision of the consortium to embrace and mainstream renewable energy technologies through ( 1 ) development of a technically-competent renewable energy industry workforce .
( 2 ) fostering of the production of more energy from Wisconsin grown agriculture products and by-products .
( 3 ) encouragement of the use of distributed sources of energy generation .
( 4 ) promotion of the understanding and knowledge of renewable energy applications.CERET focuses on ( 1 ) establishing a technology demonstration site where business , industry , farmers , agribusinesses , consumers , legislative and governmental leaders , trades people , students , and educators can learn about renewable energy technologies and distributed sources of energy generation from the around the U.S. and the world .
( 2 ) working with business and industry partners to provide hands-on training and new curriculums for skilled workers in the distributed energy generation , new and emerging energy technologies , and renewable energy field .
( 3 ) encouraging the use of ethanol , bio-diesel , and other Wisconsin-based renewable fuels from agricultural sources .
( 4 ) making the promise of renewable and distributed energy technologies a reality for Wisconsin.CERET includes as partners and collaborators Madison Area Technical College , Nicolet Area Technical College , the University of Wisconsin Madison Biological Sciences Engineering , the Wisconsin Technical College System Board and Foundation , Milwaukee School of Engineering , Wisconsin state agencies including the Department of Agriculture , Trade and Consumer Protection , Department of Commerce , and Department of Administration Divisions of Energy and Alternative Fuels , Alliant Energy Corporation , Wisconsin Public Service , and energy consultants , equipment producers and skilled trades associations.CERET offers technical training and education to incumbent workers as well as students seeking careers in renewable energy technologies .
To insure that faculty of college students and teachers of high school students are well prepared in these technologies , the project is conducting workshops and courses for teachers .
The project also facilitates discussion and implementation of a public voice for renewable energy technologies through a partnership with the Wisconsin Educational Communications Board .
CERET provides training for the workforce needed to implement technologies for energy generation and distribution to sustain the economic strength and competitiveness of Wisconsin and the United States .
0202034 Little The mixing mechanisms induced in water by bubble-plumes will be identified and incorporated into a coupled bubble-plume reservoir model for design and operation of hypolimnetic oxygenation systems.Field testing will be conducted using a linear bubble-plume diffuser in a small water supply reservoir in Virginia and using six circular bubble-plume diffusers in a mid-sized eutrophic lake in Switzerland .
Oxygen transfer and plume induced mixing will be monitored before , during and after diffuser operation .
In addition , biogeochemical fluxes will be monitored.This research will enable the development of the first scientifically rigorous coupled bubble-plume/ two dimensional reservoir model that includes mechanistic features of oxygen transfer , plume-induced mixing and the impact on biogeochemical fluxes , including SOD .
Postdoctoral Fellowship Not Available Project SummaryThe Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Technology ( PMT ) program is establishing an A.A.S .
degree in PMT at Bronx Community College , the first of its kind in the City University of New York .
The PMT program is a chemical technology program specifically designed to prepare technicians to meet the growing needs of the New York , New Jersey , and Connecticut tri-state pharmaceutical , cosmetics , and related industries .
To accomplish the primary goals of the PMT program , objectives and activities addressing the following categories are being implemented a ) Curriculum and course development ; b ) Instructional materials adaptation and development ; c ) College faculty and high school teacher training and professional development ; and d ) Student enrichment and internship activities .
The PMT curriculum is incorporating the Voluntary Industry Standards ( VIS ) of the American Chemical Society .
Long established ties between the Department and local chemical and pharmaceutical industries are an integral component in the design of this program.The Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Technology A.A.S .
degree curriculum is related to a series of secondary school programs such as the Tech Prep , School-To-Work , STEP and C-STEP programs in the Bronx and supported by the Bronx Educational Alliance and the Greater New Jersey Process Technology Alliance .
Articulation agreements leading to the B.S .
and B.A .
science degree programs in CUNY and other colleges are in place .
Thus , the program is providing new career pathways for minority students and other individuals by establishing strong viable links from high school to college level science and technology education to job placement .
Graduates of the program will be in a competitive position to fill rewarding entry-level technician positions in the regional industries .
Other long-term results , beyond the duration of the project , will be to increase the retention and the enrollment of minority and female Bronx students in science and technology programs .
Mathematical Sciences Fellowship The objective of this work is to establish the mechanisms of combustion of complex metal particles consisting of two different metals , typically an aluminum core covered by another metal such as nickel , titanium or zirconium , in inert or oxidizing atmospheres .
The study includes the fundamental processes that control ignition and combustion of single particles and propagation of reaction waves in clouds of particles .
Influences on combustion of chemistry , morphology ( size and shape ) , and concentration of particles , as well as composition of the gas phase , are clarified on both the microscopic ( single particle ) and macroscopic ( particle cloud ) scales .
To do this , advanced experimental techniques are developed based on electrodynamic levitation and electrodynamic fluidization .
Also , computer-assisted electrothermography of complex metal wires is used to obtain kinetic data on metal-metal and metal-gas reactions .
These data provide a basis for modeling combustion of complex metal particles , accounting for such characteristics as intermetallic reactions and cracking of solid shells.The results of this work are directly relevant for applications in both materials synthesis and propulsion .
Combustion of particle suspensions in gas is an attractive method for continuous production of intermetallic compounds .
Complex metal particles in rocket propellants offer reduced agglomeration and lower ignition temperature than pure aluminum .
DMS-0202812L .
Peterson , T. Branson , G. Jensen , G. Olafsson , A. RyanThis award provides partial support for students and active researchmathematicians and scientists with limited means of support to attendand participate in the 2002 , 2003 , and 2004 meetings of the MidwestGeometry Conference .
The award together with other funding will coverall expenses of the plenary speakers.The 2002 conference will be held on the main campus of the Universityof North Dakota ( April 26-28 ) and will be sponsored by the NSF , NorthDakota EPSCoR , North Dakota State University , and the University ofNorth Dakota .
The conference will include the following four sessionsand speakers1 .
Lie Groups and Geometry .
Speakers Jiri Dadok ( Indiana ) , C. Robin Graham ( Univ .
of Washington ) , and Bernhard Kroetz ( Ohio State ) 2 .
Quantum Geometry and Topology .
Speakers Abhay Ashtekar ( Penn State , Physics ) , Louis Kauffman ( Univ .
of Illinois at Chicago ) , and Jack Morava ( Johns Hopkins Univ. ) 3 .
Geometric PDE .
Speakers Sigurd Angenent ( Wisconsin ) , Bennett Chow ( Univ .
of California , San Diego ) ,4 .
Gravitation .
Speakers Peter van Nieuwenhuizen ( SUNY Stony Brook , Physics ) , Andrew Waldron ( Univ .
of California , Davis ) The organizers expect to recruit two additional speakers .
Furtherinformation is available at http//www.und.nodak.edu/dept/math/mgc2002The 2003 conference will take place at Washington University inSt .
Louis , probably in May .
Gary Jensen , of Washington University , isthe lead organizer .
Tentative conference plans include sessions onthe following four topics1 .
Three-manifolds , hyperbolic geometry , and geometric group theory2 .
Geometry , analysis , and probability on discrete groups3 .
Minimal submanifolds4 .
Surface immersions in spaceThe University of Arkansas will host the 2004 conference sometime in2004 , most likely in the spring .
John Ryan , of the University ofArkansas , will be the lead organizer .
A tentative list of topics forthe conference is as follows1 .
Nonlinear analysis on manifolds and metric spaces2 .
Spinor geometry3 .
Geometric group theory4 .
Non-commutative differential geometryOrganizers of the 2003 and 2004 conferences will develop more detailedplans in the months immediately preceding the respective conferences .
Mathematical Sciences Fellowship In this project funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division , Judge will carry out research in the area of high-resolution electronic spectroscopy .
Specifically , the singlet-triplet band system of selenoformaldehyde ( CH2Se ) will be investigated .
Thiophosgene ( Cl2CS ) and nitrosomethane ( CH3NO ) will also be analyzed .
Improved computer codes will be written for the simulation of spectra , for the absorption and emission that originates from an initial single vibronic level , for the calculation of Franck-Condon factors , and other features .
The codes will be shared with other investigators in the field .
The work will be done in collaboration with groups at the University of Kentucky , the University of Akron , and the University Claude Bernard in Lyon , France .
Undergraduate students will participate in this research.This project deals with problems in the area of high-resolution molecular electronic spectroscopy .
The research will be done in collaboration with groups at the University of Kentucky , the University of Akron , and the University Claude Bernard in Lyon , France .
The experimental work will be accompanied by the development of computer codes specifically designed to deal with the complexity of the spectral band systems .
This research will be conducted with the aid of undergraduate students .
They will participate in the work done at their home institution as well as with on-site activities at the University of Kentucky .
The students will gain valuable experience in modern research techniques and acquire both experimental and theoretical skills .
These will be of advantage in their advanced studies , or work in industry , government laboratories or academia .
Not Available This project consists of two components ( 1 ) developing a curriculum and instructional materials that provide community college students with actual research experience as a core part of their instruction and ( 2 ) designing a recruitment strategy to attract a variety of students to programs and retain them .
The research focuses on developing a treatment for a genetic disorder called xeroderma pigmentosum ( XP ) .
XP is a serious disorder that causes patients to suffer severe skin damage ( including serious burns and DNA damage ) when exposed to minimal sunlight .
The disorder is caused by mutations in genes responsible for repairing DNA damaged by UV light .
When DNA can not be repaired , mutations accumulate and cancer develops .
In fact , approximately half of all XP patients are diagnosed with skin cancer by age 10 .
City College of San Francisco ( CCSF ) , Bio-Link , and the University of California San Francisco ( UCSF ) , are collaborating on this project.The motivation to undertake this project rests on three factors .
First , students learn best when they see the real-world , human connections of the content they are learning .
By teaching courses in this manner , students gain an immediate practical understanding of two important concepts ( 1 ) the importance of biotechnology in the search for treatments for diseases and ( 2 ) the essence of life as a research assistant .
The second reason for undertaking this project is to increase the diversity and number of students pursuing careers in science generally and biotechnology specifically .
Third , the motivation rests on the fact that this project exposes students to world-class researchers from UCSF , and the research in which they are involved is leading to advancing knowledge about genetic disorders generally and XP specifically .
The tangible deliverables of this project include ( 1 ) a model for curriculum design that blends education and technical research experiences ; ( 2 ) a set of instructional materials in cell culture and research that promote real-world applications , hands-on experiences , and problem-solving skills ; ( 3 ) a model recruitment strategy based on research and tested through actual experience ; and ( 4 ) research findings with respect to XP ( and other related diseases ) to which students have contributed.Bio-Link is disseminating the Fix-a-Gene products by making them available through the online instructional materials clearinghouse ; featuring the project and materials at the annual Bio-Link Summer Fellows program that brings together community college and high school biotechnology educators from across the nation ; and showcasing the project in the national Bio-Link newsletter .
An advisory panel composed of individuals with expertise in XP research , cell culture , and community college biotechnology education is guiding the project .
In addition , an external evaluator provides formative assistance in developing the curriculum and instructional materials and recruitment strategy in addition to conducting a summative analysis .
This dissertation investigates how Beirut 's locally based ethnic and religious factionalism affects the plans for urban reconstruction in the wake of the Lebanese civil war .
Global and national elites have championed plans for a new modern commercial city but now have to negotiate with previously subordinated ethnic groups who seized neighborhood power bases during the war .
Urban reconstruction is therefore shaped by struggles between centralization and decentralization , elite and subordinate groups , global and local economics .
The process in Beirut is expected to reflect similar conflicts in multi-ethnic cities around the world .
Archival newspaper data will supplement qualitative field work and interviews that have already been completed .
The paired eolian system of the Columbia Plateau is composed of the extensive Palouse loess of variable thickness and upwind dune fields that are derived from reworking of sand- and silt-rich slackwater deposits from multiple episodes of Wisconsin giant outburst flooding from Glacial Lake Missoula .
Few models exist that explain changes in the thickness and distribution of loess accumulations .
We will investigate three models that describe the interaction of migrating sands with loess and influences of topography , bioclimate , and source sediment character that control the thickness and distribution of loess .
Field mapping will include sample collection on a regional scale to determine the temporal and spatial distribution of saltation- versus suspension-dominated eolian units .
Timing of stability ( represented by paleosols ) and eolian activity ( represented by eolian sand an loess units ) will be determined by luminescence dating that measures the last time sediments were exposed to sunlight .
We will determine 1 ) when and where loess deposition began following latest-Wisconsin outburst floods , 2 ) if eolian saltation in upwind dunes was active concurrently with suspension fallout downwind , 3 ) if periods of saltator release inferred from sand-rich intervals in the loess were associated with periods of heightened aridity , and 4 ) the mass accumulation rates of loess .
Dust emissions on the Columbia Plateau today resulting from dryland farming are hazardous through the presence of particulate matter less than 10 microns in size in the air and reduced visibility .
This regional study will show how the Columbia Plateau system has responded to climate change through time , allowing future dust emissions to be predicted .
While paired eolian systems do exist elsewhere in the world ( China , Europe , Alaska , North American Great Plains ) , the Columbia Plateau offers the opportunity to study multiple models of loess generation on a workable geographic scale , to add to the knowledge of the dynamics of paired eolian systems , and to enhance the record of late-Pleistocene to Holocene climate change for the Columbia Plateau .
As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award , this award will also provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research career .
0202606AgrawalThe International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad .
The program 's awards provide opportunities for joint research , and the use of unique or complementary facilities , expertise and experimental conditions abroad.This award will support a twenty-four month research fellowship by Dr. Alka Agrawal to work with Dr. Robert Menard at the Pasteur Institute in Paris , France.This project will involve the study of the basis of the irradiated sporozoite vaccine , which remains the most effective malaria vaccine to date .
Irradiated sporozoites are able to infect liver cells , but in the liver they fail to develop into stages of the parasite that later infect red blood cells .
The PI will develop a technique for identifying genes in P. berghei , a species that infects rodents , that are essential for parasite differentiation in the host liver .
She will then test the defective mutants for their ability to serve as attenuated malaria vaccines .
The expectation is that a number of genes will be found that are essential for parasite development in the liver , as well as parasite mutants that could serve as attenuated vaccines or the starting point for new vaccines.The Pasteur Institute is well known for its focus on infectious disease and has several investigators working on malaria .
AbstractCollaborative ( 0202087 ) David Meyer , UCSD & ( 0202055 ) Mitchell Rothstein , U of GeorgiaSystems for Quantum Learning Perceptrons and NetworksTwo radical ideas have infiltrated computer science and engineering from the natural sciences that computers might learn , like biological systems , and that computation might he quantum mechanical , like physical systems .
These ideas have led to artificial neural networks and machine learning theory , and to quantum computation , respectively .
The practical advantages of these two computational models are orthogonal the former are used to attack practical problems like image classification and control of complex systems for which there are no obvious algorithmic approaches ; the latter ( putting aside the fact that large scale quantum computers have not yet been built ) has a known algorithm for only one specific practical problem-factoring large numbers -- but that algorithm runs immensely faster than the best classical algorithm known.The project combines both of these computational models .
It will address the possiblility of quantum learning for practical reasons .
The ultimate goal is to develop quantum learning models which have strengths analogous to classical ones-the ability to find quantum solutions to problems for which there is no apparent quantum algorithmic solution .
Only the most rudimentary steps have been taken in this direction-hence the project will approach this goal from the bottom up .
The PI 's will investigate a specific architecture ( inspired by biology ) quantum perceptrons , and more generally , quantum neural networks .
Then will carefully define a completely quantum perceptron which can be connected into a network , analyze its capacity , derive learning rules for it , apply these rules to various tasks , and extend each of these objectives to quantum neutral networks .
This work will emphasize the importance of designing quantum systems with performance not achievable by corresponding classical systems .
Abstract00202791 , Philip Liu , Cornell UniversityThe Third International Workshop on Long Wave Runup ModelsThis action is to provide support for The Third International Workshop on Long Wave Runup Models , which will be held in July 2003 at Okushiri Island , Japan .
This island was severely damaged during the Hokkaido-Oki tsunami on 12 July 1993 .
The IUGG Tsunami Commission ( IUGG/TC ) biennial meeting will be held in Sapporo , Japan , prior to this workshop , providing the opportunity for the workshop participants to attend both meetings .
Approximately 45 active researchers ( with a strong international component ) will discuss the following critical issues concerning the accuracy of tsunami runup models1 -D and 2-D analytical solutions for shoreline movementsModeling of bathymetry and topography data2D and 3D landslide generated tsunamisTsunami forces on a coastal structureAn in-depth examination on each topic will be presented .
Discussion sections will center on several benchmark problems designed specifically for each topic .
The workshop will have a dedicated WWW page , which will include the benchmark problems as well as other workshop information .
In addition to the technical discussions mentioned above , the workshop will also focus on the NSF sponsored NEES ( National Earthquake Engineering Simulation ) project ; in particular , the status and future plans for the large-scale tsunami wave basin at Oregon State University .
This will also provide a good opportunity to discuss the international collaboration and linkage for the NEES facilities .
The organizing committee members are Dr. Philip Liu ( Cornell University ) , Dr. Harry Yeh ( University of Washington ) , Dr. Costas Synolakis ( University of Southern California ) , and Dr. Nobuo Shuto of Iwate Prefectural University , Japan .
Drs .
Liu , Synolakis , and Yeh organized the two previous workshops on long wave runup .
The results of this workshop will be widely disseminated for further community input .
Del Mar College , a South Texas Hispanic-serving community college , in partnership with Texas A & M University-Corpus Christi , a four year Hispanic Serving Institution , is creating the Access to Teacher Preparation at Del Mar College ( ACCESS-TP ) .
The project is increasing the number of students majoring and transferring across to four-year institutions as middle and high school Career and Technology , mathematics , and science preservice teachers .
A special emphasis of the project is on those programs which mirror the modern workplace , such as computer science/CISCO academies ; GIS ; electronics ; engineering technology ; health sciences ; biotechnology ; or aviation technology .
ACCESS-TP goals and objectives include ( 1 ) Recruit and retain Del Mar College students into technology , mathematics , and science teaching fields ; ( 2 ) Give ACCESS-TP preservice teachers an understanding of teaching and modern workplace applications of Career and Technology , mathematics , and science ; and ( 3 ) Position participants in the program to transfer to a four-year preservice teacher degree program.The ACCESS-TP project is recruiting students majoring in technology , mathematics , and science into preservice teacher degree paths .
Retention of participants in teaching fields and student support for academic success include mentoring and tutoring by peers and mentoring by in-service teachers .
The Teaching and Learning Center provides additional support for ACCESS-TP preservice teachers .
The inservice teachers who provide mentoring are former participants in the Applied Connections program , through which they created instructional materials that infuse modern workplace applications into instruction .
The ACCESS-TP student participants see first-hand how these materials are used in the classroom .
This project leverages other projects that focus on teacher preparation and the underserved population of South Texas .
Not Available Information Technology ( IT ) programs in two-year colleges have provided personnel qualified for the IT workforce .
Yet corporate hiring preferences favor those with four-year degrees in almost any field combined with IT certificates or courses at the two-year college or two-year college degrees and much experience .
Present articulated degree programs emphasize business fields such as sales and personnel supervision rather than advanced standards-based technical skills .
This project investigates the extent to which industrial support exists for four-year degrees in IT that are consistent with skill standards .
Upper division skill standards in IT are developed to codify those technical and non-technical elements that are important in the selection , placement and promotion of IT workers .
The clusters of Enterprise System Analysis and Integration , Programming , Technical Writing and Database Development and Administration are emphasized .
The project also investigates best practices in the structure and use of conventional articulation models between two-year and four-year colleges and the development of a framework for offering standards-based upper division technology degrees .
0202582BrownThe International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad .
The program 's awards provide opportunities for joint research , and the use of unique or complementary facilities , expertise and experimental conditions abroad.This award will support a three month research fellowship by Dr. David J .
Brown to work with Drs .
Keith D. Shepherd and Markus Walsh , at the International Centre for Research in Agroforestry ( ICRAF ) in Nairobi , Kenya.Organic matter ( measured as carbon content ) plays a vital role in soil functioning and with a growing concern about climate change there has been increased attention paid to soil as an important source or sink for global atmospheric carbon dioxide .
Addressing these concerns , the PI proposes to 1 ) combine terrain and reflectance information to model the vertical and geographic distribution of soil organic carbon for a selected watershed in Kenya ; and 2 ) refine statistical methods for characterizing soil carbon using reflectance data .
Land degradation , food security , and fresh water sedimentation assessments in countries like Kenya ( and in the United States ) can be closely linked to the type , amount , and distribution of organic matter in the soil .
The scientific community has a vital interest in research that improves the estimates of regional and global soil carbon , and the identification of potential sites for carbon sequestration .
The hosts are pioneering the use of reflectance spectral analysis to characterize soil properties .
Using a spectrometer in the field or lab , they snap a soil sample just as a tourist snaps photos of local culture - except that their camera digitally captures light reflection over hundreds of bands from infrared through the visible light spectrum .
Ultimately , this research will allow scientists to map surface soil using satellite imagery - providing early warnings of land degradation and precise measurements of global carbon pools .
This project will complement this work with lab and field dimensions .
In the lab the PI will sequentially strip away inorganic , labile and non-labile carbon ; scanning the soil material at each step of the process .
With these scans , he can then isolate the contributions of the various fractions to the overall spectral signature of the soil , and refine models predicting soil carbon from spectral data .
In the field , he will employ digital terrain models in conjunction with spectral analysis to predict subsurface soil carbon distributions .
Slope , curvature and other more complex terrain indices can predict erosion , deposition , infiltration and depth to the water table - all factors that contribute to organic matter accumulation .
Mathematical Sciences Fellowship CMS-0202300PI Joseph DoveInstitution Virginia Polytechnic and State UniversityTitle Workshop on Geotechnical Composite SystemsAbstractA two-day workshop will be held in June , 2002 to bring together practitioners , researchers , and government agency end-users for the purpose of exploring and advancing the new , integrated field of Geotechnical Composite Systems .
Geotechnical composite systems incorporate man-made elements into soil or rock to create large-scale composite materials .
The workshop will involve 25 participants with differing backgrounds from academic institutions , specialty construction companies , governmental agencies , and engineering design firms.The most exciting and compelling issues in modern geotechnical engineering are found at the boundary between disciplines , and can not be addressed by a single group or single individual .
The principal goal of this workshop is to bring together a diverse group of researchers , practitioners , end users , and other interested persons to accomplish the following six specific objectives 1 .
Establish common ground , and a language for communication , between disciplines.2 .
Identify gaps in knowledge about geotechnical composite systems as they are used inexisting applications.3 .
Propose new types of geotechnical composite systems and new applications forexisting geotechnical composite systems.4 .
Explore how methods from other disciplines , such as composite materialsengineering , may apply to the field of geotechnical composite systems.5 .
Identify and prioritize research needs in geotechnical composite systems.6 .
Broadly disseminate the workshop results.In addition to invited participants , other individuals interested in the topic will be invited to apply for funds to attend the workshop .
Underrepresented minorities , female and academically young investigators will be particularly encouraged to apply .
The investigators will use line-of-sight ( LOS ) velocity drift measurements from the Super Dual Auroral Radar Network ( SuperDARN ) to characterize the statistical nature of velocity variability in the high latitude ionosphere .
They will use the existing SuperDARN dataset to determine the temporal variability in LOS measurements on 100X45 km spatial scales and 1 minute time scales over the entire high latitude ionosphere .
It has been shown that variability in the convection electric field is a significant factor in determining the amount of Joule heating in this region .
General circulation models of the thermosphere use statistical or averaged convection electric fields which contain no information about the small-scale variability and thus seriously underestimate the amount of Joule heating .
The wide coverage of the SuperDARN radars will allow determination of the relationships between velocity variability and magnetospheric features .
The resulting comprehensive characterizations of the electric field variability will facilitate more realistic inputs to global models and better understanding of the magnetosphere-ionosphere system .
Under normal conditions , American metropolitan areas are subject to constant change .
These changes are the product of a complex set of cause-effect interactions among different systems , with each contributing factors acting to differing degrees in different settings .
All of these factors have contributed to the expansion of areal metropolitan areas .
Among the dynamic processes occurring in metropolitan areas are the myriad decisions of households regarding whether to stay in their current residence or to move .
One conceptualization of this kind of household decision posits that a threshold exists beyond which households find the strains of remaining in their current housing unit to be too great , thereby leading them to decide to move to a different unit .
Changes in lifestyles and in the perceived characteristics of neighborhoods also have been found to affect household mobility decisions significantly .
One of the strongest influences on mobility is the perceived safety of a neighborhood .
Extant notions regarding safety and security received a profound shock on September 11 , 2001 , however , when terrorists destroyed the World Trade Center in New York City and attacked the Pentagon near Washington DC .
These events directly affected thousands of people , but millions watched in horror as events unfolded again and again .
Follow-up reports on television , on radio , in newspapers , and via other media kept the events constantly in mind .
Almost no one in the U.S. remained untouched .
This Small Grant for Exploratory Research will support a post-September 11 study of household attitudes to determine the degree to which householder perceptions of the safety and security may have altered their locational decision making .
The project will consist of a new survey of nearly 2,000 households in the Columbus , Ohio , metropolitan area .
The survey will build on a mail survey of a random sample of Franklin County homeowners conducted during the Summer of 2001 .
That survey asked questions about housing and neighborhood satisfaction and desires , mobility and remodeling plans , and household demographic characteristics .
The responses from the survey were combined with county auditor records , so that the resulting data set contained physical information about the housing unit as well as the survey answers from the nearly 50 percent of the randomly drawn sample that responded .
The original research plan called for using these data to study the influence of household and neighborhood-level characteristics on normal urban processes of growth and change .
This Small Grant for Exploratory Research support a follow-up inquiry that will proposal requests funds to add eight to ten questions to the original survey and immediately send it to a new random sample of Franklin County homeowner.Research on residential mobility responses to hazards has shown that the standard demographic predictors of mobility have it stronger influence on movement patterns than perceptions or attitudes about the hazard .
The events of September 11 were unique in the nation 's history , however .
Nearly all U.S. households experienced the events through the media and may now view their own cities as hazards -- as places where terrorists may attack .
This project will examine what effect these events have had on households ' attitudes towards their home , neighborhood , and likelihood of moving by collecting additional survey data on homeowners ' attitudes and comparing these responses to data gathered via the same survey of homeowners just prior to September 11th .
This pre- and post-event information provides a unique opportunity to examine the impact that this kind of event may have on the decisions that households make about their housing and will shed light on whether such events could shape the spatial structure of American cities and regions in the future .
Mathematical Sciences Fellowship 0202630DykeThis award supports a one-year collaborative research project between Professor Shirley Dyke at Washington University in St Louis , Missouri and Professor Masato Abe of the University of Tokyo in Japan .
The researchers will undertake a program of engineering research experiences for undergraduates in advanced technology in Japan .
It will focus on structural control , structural health monitoring , innovative materials , etc .
for the mitigation of damage to structures when subjected to severe dynamic loading .
The program will support a total of eight students from institutions around the country to spend approximately one summer month in Japan conducting an independent research project that is relevant to their ongoing research in the U.S .
The participants will likely include minorities and women .
The remainder of the summer would be spent at their host institution in the US conducting research activities .
Participants will prepare a paper on their research outcomes and give a short presentation at a colloquium .
Current research pertaining to these advanced topics in structural engineering would be significantly enhanced through input from creative young minds .
Given the opportunity to participate in research experiences , students discover that they are excited by the challenges they encounter , and intrigued by the innovative ideas and technological advancements brought about by their research .
Research is also an excellent avenue for increasing students ' enthusiasm to pursue advanced degrees .
The program will add an international dimension to the development of undergraduate researchers .
The exposure to research excellence abroad and the early experience with international collaboration will greatly enhance the future career opportunities of the participants .
The program will also encourage collaborative research projects and the initiation of new international collaborative efforts in advanced technology .
Not Available Alabama Southern Community College , with its partners from the Alabama Technology Network Center for Forestry , Paper and Chemical Technology , the Auburn University Chemical Engineering Department , and the Pulp and Paper Research Education Center at Auburn University , regional industry and participating regional K-12 school systems , are working on the development , evaluation and refinement of 12 curriculum modules .
These industry driven and national skill based curricula are being utilized in training process operators and technicians for pulp , paper , chemical industries .
This strategy of providing tools for a technician and operator education initiative is seen as the best possible solution to successfully develop qualified workers required to maintain and improve the competitiveness and sustainability of the pulp , paper and chemical manufacturing industry in the United States .
Once fully developed , the program utilizes all 12-curriculum modules ( 8 already developed and being used under previous NSF ATE funding and 4 to be developed under this project ) to extend hands-on technical education experiences for three technical degree programs at Alabama Southern as well as with regional industry to upgrade employee skills .
These curricula include classroom , multimedia as well as instructor-led and teaming laboratory experiences that emphasize safety and environmental issues of the process operations being modeled .
The project is producing publication-ready curriculum modules with aligned industry driven laboratory ready for regional and national dissemination .
it is also developing two workshops ; one for community college faculty preparing students for employment in pulp , paper and allied industries throughout the southeast region of the US .
The second is for high school faculty and interested high school students to provide opportunities for experiencing an industry simulated environment to strengthen math , chemistry , teaming and workplace leadership skills .
In addition , the project focuses on increasing scholarship and internship opportunities of students particularly for minorities and other groups that have been traditionally underrepresented in these industries .
Dissemination is through a project web page , presentations at national conferences and publication of articles in refereed journals .
Large sparse unstructured matrices arising from various computer simulation and modeling are commonly solved by preconditioned iterative methods .
This research project will study and design robust high performance preconditioners for parallel solution of large sparse linear systems , based on a class of multistep successive sparse approximate inverse preconditioning techniques.We will develop new concept and parallel algorithms of multistep successive preconditioning for enhancing the robustness of standard sparse approximate inverse preconditioning techniques , and generalize this concept to the context of other preconditioning techniques .
Study will be conducted to show the advantages of such approach to enhance both preconditioning accuracy and factorization stability .
We will build portable software packages to implement new preconditioning strategies for solving unstructured general sparse linear systems on high performance parallel computers.The general purpose high performance preconditioned iterative solvers from this research project are expected to make significant impact in the field of applied scientific computing .
Our experience and existing strength will ensure that theproject be carried out fully as proposed .
As U.S. industry is more and more relying on computer aided design and manufacturing , large scale computer simulation and modeling will be a vital component in new products research and development .
The outcome of this research will benefit U.S. industry as well as scientific research community by providing more efficient kernel software forlarge scale computer simulations .
Funding is provided to continue partial support for the ICES/GLOBEC North Atlantic Regional Program Office within the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea ( ICES ) .
ICES is an intergovernmental organization designed to coordinate scientific research , fisheries assessment , environmental concerns , and oceanographic matters of common interest to countries bordering the North Atlantic .
The ICES/GLOBEC program is the North Atlantic regional component of the International GLOBEC Implementation Plan .
GLOBEC ( Global Ocean Ecosystem Dynamics ) is an international research program intended to improve forecasts of the responses of the marine ecosystem to physical forcing and global change by developing our understanding of its structure and functioning under varying physical conditions .
The project office is responsible for coordinating efforts to keep interested research communities informed about ongoing work , design means for data exchange , plan cooperative research , organize workshops for the collective appraisal and analysis of information , and publish results in a timely and adequate way .
A consortium of four community colleges , each serving a geographically defined region , together with seven affiliate supercomputer sites and business partners , constitute a National Science Foundation Advanced Technology Education Center of Excellence for High Performance Computing ( HPC ) technology .
High Performance Computing refers to multi-processor computers performing complex computational operations with a particular focus on clusters .
Each college in the consortium has at least one partner High Performance Computing facility , referred to as an HPC site .
The National Center is partnering with business and industry to develop skill set standards and competencies needed for certifying HPC technicians and for developing an articulated Associate Degree program in HPC technology .
The Regional Education and Training Centers ( RETCs ) , established at each community college , are developing curricula in HPC Technology that articulate with four- year college information science , computer science , and high performance computing technology programs and that include the establishment of 2 + 2 agreements with regional high school Tech Prep Programs.Maui Community College is the lead institution in a consortium with Wake Technical Community College , Pellissippi State Technical Community College , and Contra Costa College , each chosen because of the diversity of student populations , partnerships with HPC sites and regional business and industry , and potential four-year college affiliations .
An NSF planning grant ( award 0101643 ) supported a nation-wide survey that revealed that within the next 2 to 5 years , a ) 71 % of surveyed business and industry will utilize high performance computing , ( 2 ) PC-cluster use will grow by 9 % and there will be a distinct shift offsetting the balance between PC-cluster and supercomputer use in favor of PC-clusters and c ) industry will continue to struggle to recruit , train and/or retain HPC employees .
The National Center administrator is responsible for ( a ) creating and administering a web-based certification examination for technical personnel , ( b ) overseeing curriculum development and teaching methodologies , ( c ) developing strategies for recruitment , retention and placement ; ( d ) creating a national repository of PC-cluster software , curricula and training materials for HPC technician educational programs ; ( e ) providing professional development activities for college faculty , secondary teachers and business professionals ; ( f ) developing and providing a consortium communications infrastructure ; and ( g ) supervising dissemination , evaluation and reporting activities.RETC directors are responsible for ( a ) developing curriculum and learner centered teaching methodologies , ( b ) educating faculty , people from business and industry , and secondary teachers in PC-cluster construction , management and use ; ( c ) providing professional development activities ; ( d ) developing and coordinating professional internship programs at HPC sites and business for college faculty and secondary teachers ; ( e ) coordinating student internship programs ; ( f ) assisting with program graduate placement and ( g ) developing four-year college articulation agreements and local high school 2 + 2 agreements .
Mathematical Sciences Fellowship The objective of this research program is to develop algorithms and architectures , and fabricate and demonstrate a rugged , compact , modular , versatile , opt electronic , integrated-circuit ( OEIC ) neural network and fuzzy logic coprocessor system that would work in conjunction with the standard PC microprocessor .
This OEIC co-processor will perform sophisticated parallel and/or fuzzy processing operations more efficiently than the standard PC microprocessor .
The proposed OElC co-processor will be about the size of a CD-ROM drive , and thus would fit easily inside the case of a conventional personal computer .
Another important goal of the program is that this compact OEIC co-processor be amenable to mass manufacturing.To demonstrate the feasibility of the co-processor , the proposed hardware development tasks include ( I ) design , fabrication and characterization of novel 2-D arrays of GaAs-SOS ( silicon-on sapphire ) OEIC cascadable smart pixels with a detector , integrated-circuit logic and a light source in each pixel ( resonant cavity light-emitting diodes ( RCLEDs ) in the first two years of the program , and vertical-cavity surface-emitting lasers ( VCSELs ) replacing the RCLEDs in the third year ) , ( 2 ) design , fabrication and characterization of novel reconfigurable optical interconnection elements based on arrays of Bragg-holographic phase gratings , ( 3 ) aligning ( with the help of a mask aligner ) and gluing all the components of the co-processor ( OEICs .
interconnection elements , and output photodetector array ) together into a rugged , compact , modular multi-layer sandwich configuration so as to permanently solve any micro-optics alignment problems , and ( 4 ) characterizing the resulting high-speed , multilayer optoelectronic co-processor .
The early focus of the program will be on neural network configurations .
So in addition to the above-mentioned fabrication tasks , the PI will also carry ' out the following theoretical , modeling and simulation tasks ( a ) develop algorithms , especially those suitable for programmable nearest-neighbor interconnections ( e.g .
pulse-coupled networks ) to solve a large class of multi-dimensional information processing problems , and ( b ) explore the application of these novel co-processors to three different types of problems ( i ) associative-memory-based pattern recognition , ( ii ) medical image segmentation and ( iii ) fusion of a set of low-contrast spectro-polarimetric infrared images into a single high-contrast image .
Mark S. Spector , Naval Research LaboratoryMinority Research Opportunities in Science and Engineering at the Naval Research LaboratoryDue to cultural and historic barriers , minorities continue to be underrepresented in science , mathematics , and engineering .
Despite some growth in the number of minorities receiving undergraduate degrees in science and engineering , there has been little increase in the number of minorities at the doctoral level .
It is essential for the scientific community to provide training opportunities and role models for promising young students in order to encourage them to pursue advanced degrees in science , mathematics , and engineering and careers in research .
The Center for Bio/Molecular Science and Engineering ( CBMSE ) at the Naval Research Laboratory ( NRL ) has developed a summer internship program for minority students that give the interns the opportunity to experience professional laboratory research first hand .
Participation is essentially focused on undergraduates at the nation 's Historically Black Colleges and Universities , Minority Institutions , and Tribal Colleges and Universities ( HBCU/MI/TCU 's ) .
While there are several programs that provide support for students pursuing careers in health care , this program focuses uniquely on training future scientists and engineers.Based upon previous success , it is proposed to renew the program .
It is proposes to increase the number of summer internships to approximately fifteen per year by placing interns in the NRL 's Center for Bio/Molecular Science and Engineering , Physical Metallurgy Branch , and Surface Modification Branch and increasing our recruiting effort to pursue students at additional HBCU/MI/TCU 's .
It is also proposed to support up to five students per year to continue their research at their home institute during the following school year as part of a collaborative effort between NRL scientists and faculty members at HCBU/MI/TCU's.The broader impact of this activity is highlighted by the accomplishments already made .
During the first ten years of the program , ninety-three outstanding students have spent ten weeks working at the Naval Research Laboratory on exciting projects at the leading edge of science and technology .
This has included 48 women and 45 men from a variety of scientific disciplines Biology , Chemical Engineering , Mechanical Engineering , Physics , Chemistry , Mathematics , Electrical Engineering and Computer Science .
Of the students who have completed their undergraduate degrees , many have gone on to receive master 's degrees and approximately twenty are currently in doctoral programs .
With National Science Foundation support , the University of Hawaii Manoa - Maui Community College will conduct a comprehensive self-assessment of current and planned science , technology , engineering and mathematics ( STEM ) programs .
The assessment includes a review of the existing STEM instructional infrastructure , curriculum , faculty professional development opportunities , technology used for instruction , high school to college transition programs , community service , and Native Hawaiian student retention and success in STEM fields.Assessment outcomes will support the development of a strategic plan to strengthen Maui Community College STEM programs to better meet the needs of the community and specifically , the Native Hawaiian population .
Not Available The goal for this MUSES exploratory project is to integrate life cycle-based environmental , social and economic design criteria and ECC microstructure tailoring to enhance the sustainability of infrastructure systems .
Worldwide construction of concrete infrastructure such as roads , bridges and pipes exceeds 6 billion tons/yr .
The resulting impacts are dramatic and include greenhouse gas emissions , land disturbances , air pollution , and construction-related traffic congestion and vehicle damage .
Engineered cementitious composites ( ECC ) are a new class of materials being developed to improve the performance of infrastructure systems .
ECC formulations are designed through microstructure tailoring of inputs including matrix ( cement and fly ash ) , fiber ( virgin and recycled polymers , and interface elements .
While ECC strain capacity is far superior to normal concrete , overall life cycle costs and benefits have not yet been evaluated.Developing these criteria is complex due to widely varying scales of analysis ( nanometers in materials science to kilometers in the geological sciences ) , the long-term nature and consequences of infrastructure systems , and the need to optimize the scheduling of large capital investments .
To address this complexity , this research will draw upon a multi-disciplinary team from the University of Michigan 's Advanced Civil Engineering Material Research Lab , Center for Sustainable Systems , College of Engineering , School of Public Health , School of Natural Resources and Environment , and Department of Geological Sciences .
This project will emphasize student education and research training through two graduate student research assistantships ; specialized industrial ecology curriculum ; a field component at a local cement manufacturer ; a MUSES seminar series ; and monthly research team workshops Continental margins are dynamic regions that receive inputs of organic carbon derived from both terrestrial and marine sources .
Once introduced by the Mississippi or fixed on the Louisiana shelf , POC is carried along the shelf , decomposed , buried , or transported to deeper regions in the Gulf of Mexico .
Based on coastal primary production estimates and riverine inputs , only 20-50 % of the organic carbon in coastal waters off the Mississippi is actually buried in Louisiana shelf sediments , and < 40 % of that buried carbon is of terrestrial origin .
Thus , the fate of 50-80 % of the carbon fraction delivered by the Mississippi that can not be accounted for in shelf sediments remains a key question in developing a North American carbon budget .
Under this funding , the PIs propose a combined approach of compound-specific stable and radiocarbon isotopic techniques and biomarker distributions to evaluate fates and transport of organic carbon in the Mississippi River delta shelf and slope .
The working hypothesis of this study is that seasonal changes in the composition and age of SOC across the Louisiana shelf/slope are largely determined by pulses in terrestrially- and marine-derived organic carbon which occur at distinct time periods controlled by changes in Mississippi River discharge and storm energy .
This research will test the hypothesis that the adsorption of organic carbon onto the interlayer surfaces of smectitic clay minerals comprises a significant mode of carbon sequestration and preservation in the geologic record .
This model provides a unifying theory for organic carbon burial and the formation of some black shale deposits in which dissolved organic carbon present in natural waters and pore fluids is attracted to charged mineral surfaces of detrital clay minerals , and preserved from microbial degradation by physical sheltering .
Upon burial , mineral surfaces may act to coordinate polymerization of complex organic substances such as kerogen and catalyze cracking during catagenesis .
The proposed research will 1 ) determine the geological extent of the relationship between interlayer mineral surface area and total organic carbon in a range of black shale deposits , economically important source rocks , and modern sediments , 2 ) establish or dismiss the presence of organic matter within the smectite interlayer sites of these deposits using X-ray diffraction ( XRD ) techniques and high resolution transmission electron microscopy ( HRTEM ) imaging of crystal edges and determine whether there is amorphous kerogen that is mineral associated , and 3 ) measure the compositional differences of OM associated with mineral surfaces versus the total bulk TOC and particulate fraction separated using density and centrifugation techniques .
The objective of this Biocomplexity in the Environment ( BE ) for Materials Use Science , Engineering , & Society ( MUSES ) project is to establish a research framework for developing an assessment tool for product development that integrates engineering , economic , regulatory and environmental concerns .
While the analytical elements exist for individual consideration of these concerns , environmental tools have seen little practical use in product development .
This limited application derives from the absence of methods putting the environmental analyses into the appropriate engineering , economic and regulatory contexts so that consistent strategies can be devised .
This project focuses on the automobive industry and the product & process development issues arising from the environmental challenges confronting these companies .
The intention is to use this area as a testbed for developing general methods of tying environmental assessment with engineering , economic and regulatory analyses , forming an integrated product assessment tool.This effort also emphasizes two long-range educational objectives .
One objective focuses on development of interdisciplinary , case-based courses to demonstrate the use of the design tools developed through the proposed research .
The second educational objective is the development of the collaborative capabilities of faculty from disparate fields , including issues of faculty development in these areas .
A key feature of the work is the formation of an interdisciplinary team that includes experts in the broad range of fields necessary to treat the multidisciplinary problem of refining the product development process in a large industrial firm .
This planning project is expected to lead to fundamental research on design of alternative processes , systems , and product development structures that optimize the use of materials throughout their life cycles .
During the machining of metals , plastic deformation and friction lead to the production of heat in the workpiece , which results in complex deformation in the cutting zone .
Recently , several numerical models of this highly coupled process have been produced in response to the increased interest in high speed machining .
However , while a small number of researchers , in the past and recently , have examined temperature fields during cutting at low or traditional cutting speeds , few if any experimental studies exist that measure temperature fields in the work piece during cutting at high speeds , i.e .
20-100 m/s .
It is important to characterize the thermal field in the cutting zone during high speed machining in order to characterize friction and wear characteristics in this area and to understand the heat generated there , which affects chip formation and possibly residual stress formation as well .
Ultimately , such investigations should direct further advancement in materials development for high speed machining applications .
In this work , infrared detectors are used to experimentally measure the temperature distribution at the surface of a workpiece during high-speed orthogonal cutting , and complex numerical models are developed to predict and understand the active mechanisms of deformation and failure .
Finally , from these temperature measurements and models , the heat generated in the primary deformation zone is examined , characterized and related to the residual stress distribution in the workpiece .
The main thrust is to better understand , and therefore reduce , the effects of residual stress on distortion of high-speed machined , thin walled components .
The approach draws on the experience of experimental , numerical and industrial researchers to attack this difficult , economically relevant problem with a comprehensive experimental , theoretical and developmental approach .
Specific benefits of the proposed work are ( 1 ) Detailed understanding the interplay between finished product quality , material behavior and heat generation in high speed machining ; ( 2 ) New efficient and accurate computational algorithms to model high-speed machining in order to facilitate full understanding of the observed interactions between tool , material and cut quality or residual stress formation ; and ( 3 ) New directions in aluminum alloy design for high-speed cutting with emphasis on minimizing the effects of machining and alloy processing parameters on the formation of residual stresses in the finished product .
Overall , an integrated materials-mechanics/modeling-experimentation approach to the problem will be used throughout the work leading to a multidisciplinary solution to the problem of residual stress distortion of parts machined at high-speed .
9970454This project concerns problems in representation theory .
Recent progress in the theory of Types suggests that the Harmonic analysis on p-adic groups can be completely understood via harmonic analysis on the associated Hecke algebras .
Moreover these Hecke algebras are expected to be generalized affine Hecke algebras and so should be easier to analyze .
Dr. Kim will try to establish the fact that many of the classical groups defined over p-adic fields give rise to algebras that are generalized affine Hecke algebras .
Further she intends to study the relation between buildings of the classical groups and buildings of the general linear group .
Finally she intends to consider how base changes relate to the representations of Hecke algebras.Representation theory is a major mathematical technique for exploiting the presence of symmetry .
For example , the structure of the hydrogen atom , one of the fundamental computations in quantum mechanics , is controlled by representation theory .
Another way of thinking about representation theory is as a generalization of the theory of eigenvalues and matrices that many people see in a college course on basic linear algebra .
This project addresses two important questions in representation theory .
One potentially has important applications to number theory .
The other concerns a generalization of the theory of angular momentum in quantum mechanics .
It will help describe how pair of interacting quantum mechanical systems of a rather general type breaks up into simpler systems .
DMS-0223533Shing-Tung YauThis award provides partial support for mathematicians fromunderrepresented groups and other junior mathematicians without other means of support to attend a Geometry and Topology Conferenceon May 3,4 , and 5 at Harvard University .
The first day of the conference will emphasize Karen Uhlenbeck 's leading role in mentoring women in Mathematics and feature four female speakersfrom a well known leader in the field to other more junior mathematicians .
There will be several poster session during theconference including one on Women in Science .
The second and third days of the conference will feature lectures from twelve eminent Geometers and Topologists .
Further details about the conference , including lists of speakers and local hotels can be found at http//math.harvard.edu/jdg/index.html Eric I. Altman , Yale UniversitySpin-electronic Dynamics in Three Terminal Coupled Quantum StructuresThis project focuses on exploring enabling technologies to allow the spin degree of freedom to be used as the controlling mechanism for quantum communication and computing .
The principal investigators will fabricate and study coupled quantum-dot ( QD ) systems consisting of closely spaced III-V semiconductor , gallium arsenide ( GaAs ) quantum dots controlled by separated electrodes .
The systems will be designed to transmit spin charges into QDs and to couple them in the neighboring dots by exchange interaction .
Such a system is the first step toward building quantum logic gates , because the spin of one dot affects the electronic charge transport in the other dots by the exchange coulomb blockage effect .
The spin states and the degree of coupling between the quantum dots can also be controlled by applied magnetic and/or electric fields .
Magnetic contacts will serve as spin sources to provide carriers with particular spin orientation .
The tunneling of these carriers through a particular dot will depend on the available spin state in the dot .
This provides a convenient and practical way of determining the spin orientation of a particular dot and thus the variation of the spin in this dot after a certain time interval .
Studying the spin dynamics in the context of manipulating and controlling individual spin states in each dot , and collectively in coupled quantum dots provides basic technology for fabricating quantum transistors and logic gates for quantum computing and communication devices .
Successful fabrication of coupled dot systems requires employing state of the art synthetic methods at SUNY Binghamton .
The fabrication of electrode structures at nanometer scales will use lithography on metallic thin films .
The preparation of semiconductor quantum dots , such as GaAs , in the nanometer scales will utilize various synthetic , processing and assembling strategies .
Methods will also be developed to produce GaAsMn nanoparticles ; the manganese ( Mn ) doping can enhance spin state operating temperature in quantum dots .
These semiconductor nanoparticles will be characterized using spectroscopic and microscopic techniques at both Yale and Binghamton .
The spin charge exchange interaction between neighboring QDs will be studied by producing highly monodispersed III-V semiconductor nanoparticles self-assembled in a narrow gap about hundreds of nanometers wide between two metallic electrodes made by lithography .
The study of detailed tunneling characteristics as a function of temperature and bias will be carried out in a magnetic cryostat at Binghamton .
At Yale , scanning tunneling microscopy will be used to characterize the size , morphology , and electronic properties of the nanoparticles and their positioning between the electrodes .
Magneto-infrared spectroscopy will be carried out on self-assembled semiconductor nano-particle arrays to examine spin exchange coupling between QDs .
Broader Impact This research will strongly impact future technologies in new functional devices based on spin degree of freedom , particularly providing assistance to the development of three-terminal spin field-effect-transistors using the developed techniques .
These activities will allow the graduate students involved to learn and prepare themselves to become future technologists for developing next generation communication and computing devices .
The integration of the nanostructure and novel computing technology into the curricula will provide interdisciplinary experiences for better career training for the students involved .
The long-term goal of this proposal is to identify and determine the role of all the genes involved in a plants response to salt and water stress .
Over the last decade , it has become clear that responses to water deficit and ion imbalance are governed by complex molecular and biochemical signal transduction processes , which coordinately act to determine tolerance or sensitivity at the whole-plant levet .
Within the last five years , however , advances in genomics , informatics , and functional genomics have made it technically feasible to gain a global understanding of the gene complement or set that becomes integrated to effect abiotic stress tolerance .
To tackle the genetic basis of this tolerance in higher plants in the most efficient , comprehensive , and integrative way possible Drs .
R. Bressan , P. Hasegawa ( Purdue University ) , R. Burnap , J. Cushman , R. Prade ( Oklahoma State University ) and H. Bohnert , D. Gaibraith , J-K. Zhu ( University of Arizona ) have formed a consortium .
Each participant has a documented and extensive experience in this research area with a proven record of productivity and in many instances past or present collaborations.This team will employ three distinct , yet complementary approaches to isolate , characterize , and assess the function of the core set of stress-related genes that provide the basis for the water and salt stress tolerance phenotype in plants.The first approach will encompass the functional identification of genes important to stress tolerance by random and targeted mutagenesis strategies in well-studied model organisms ( Synechocystis PCC6803 , Saccharomyces cerevisiae , Aspergillus nidulans , and Arabidopsis thaliana ) .
For Arabidopsis , they will identify , map and clone genetic Ioci from a large set of mutants defective in stress tolerance or signaling .
The resulting sets of mutants will be used for complementation studies using genes from higher plant sources.The second approach aims to define the core set of stress-related transcripts from both sensitive plants ( Arabidopsis thaliana and rice ) and resistant plants ( Dunaliella salina and ice plant ) using EST sequendng and microarray analysis .
This approach will focus on the comparative study of gene expression patterns in salt and drought sensitive and resistant organisms , since recent studies of resistant organisms have revealed the existence of mechanisms of stress tolerance not present or not appropriately expressed in sensitive organisms.The third approach will extend the functional analysis of stress-related transcripts by monitoring in situ Iocalizations by using promoter trapping approaches and gain-of-function studies.These approaches represent logical extensions of ongoing work in individual groups within this center .
They will foster interaction and integration of Consortium activities through daily interactions , workshops/meetings and extended work periods in member laboratories for their students and postdoctoral fellows to ensure a new generation of researchers trained in multi-faceted and interdisciplinary problem solving .
The impact of abiotic stress on crop productivity is remarkable according to USDA statistics and amounts to two-thirds of all yield reductions in agriculture .
This proposal is exceptionally timely , combines unique expertise , is hypothesis-driven and culminates in a dearly defined goal - understanding the number , nature and networking of genes and physiological mechanisms that constitute plant abiotic stress tolerance .
AbstractPI Lawrence Brown ( Proposal ID 0223304 ) Title Service Engineering of Human Tele-Queues Empirically Based Stochastic Analysis of Telephone Call CentersA call center is a service network in which agents provide tele-services , here to be interpreted as either telephone-based services or , more generally , any online-service with customers and servers being remote from each other .
Sound scientific principles are prerequisites for sustaining the complex socio-technical enterprise of the call center .
The overall goal is to contribute to the theory that supports these principles and to the creation of new ones.The proposed research builds from an analysis of two unique records of call center operations .
These contain complete call-by-call data for the operation over approximately one year of two call centers of different size and operational character .
This data will be analyzed in order to understand the mathematical queueing and network characteristics of such centers as they actually operate .
Special attention will be given to developing an understanding of the role of scale and efficiency in relation to such operations .
The operational features of these two call centers will then be adapted into realistic mathematical models for their operations .
On the basis of preliminary work already done , it is expected that these mathematical models will differ in important respects from those in current use for analyzing and predicting performance of such large-scale service operations .
In particular , it is expected that new theory will be specifically developed to model the queueing characteristics of centers that operate in the high-volume high-efficiency domain.Call centers can be viewed naturally and usefully as queueing systems .
The most widely used queueing model for a call center is the Erlang-C model , also denoted the M/M/S queue .
The Erlang-C model is deficient as an accurate model of a call center in several respects .
One of these is that it does not accommodate customers ' impatience while waiting .
The Erlang-C model also involves other assumptions such as Poisson arrival times and exponential service times .
These will be tested against the data , and modified theory will be developed as needed .
The statistical analysis will be derived according to the primitive elements of a call-center system arrivals , queueing behavior , and services .
The interactions of these primitives will then be analyzed , and alternate queueing models will be examined .
0223818GreenbergDescription This award supports US-India cooperative research in quantum statistics .
US physicist Oscar W. Greenberg , University of Maryland College Park and Indian collaborator Ashok K. Mishra , Institute of Mathematical Sciences , Tharamani will explore the fundamental issues of mathematical physics that lie at the heart of quantum mechanics .
In recent years , physicists have begun to study and apply new forms of statistics that are beyond the conventional fermi and bose statistics .
The collaborators will study the new statistics with particular regard to their applicability to some basic postulates in physics that , due to technological advances , can now be tested to high precision through experiment .
Scope This collaboration is likely to bring about interesting advances in mathematical physics .
It will also initiate a new partnership between the University of Maryland and the Institute of Mathematical Sciences , a premier center for research in theoretical physics .
India has a tradition of excellence in this field that includes S.N .
Bose 's contributions to particle statistics ( Bose-Einstein statistics ) .
At best , this collaboration will enable each scientist to bring a distinct cultural perspective to their research on the statistics of elementary particles .
This project is supported by the Indian Department of Science & Technology ( DST ) under the NSF/DST joint program .
ABSTRACTCarbon enters ecosystems through a single process , photosynthesis , and nearly all is returned to the atmosphere through respiration , some 50-80 % of which occurs below ground .
Soil respiration integrates root metabolism and the activity of decomposer organisms .
While the major processes affecting plant metabolic ( autotrophic ) respiration and decomposition rates ( heterotrophic respiration ) are known , the ability to predict variations in soil respiration in space and time is limited - a major uncertainty in the current and future carbon cycle .
The work proposed here will combine new measurement and modeling approaches for separating autotrophic and heterotrophic respiration , and determining the age of C respired from soils .
At field sites in the Ameriflux network that span a range of North American biomes and climates , these methods will include ( 1 ) frequent , automated , measurements of soil respiration and related factors ; ( 2 ) isotope mass balance methods based on measurements of stable isotopes and radiocarbon in respired CO2 ; and ( 3 ) incubations to determine responses of heterotrophic respiration components to changing soil conditions ; and ( 4 ) at some sites , manipulation of soil moisture content through rainfall exclusion .
The data generated will be used to partition soil respired C into autotrophic and heterotrophic components , to determine the age of heterotrophically respired C and identify the components of soil organic matter contributing to its production , and to determine how these relationships chance with controlling variables ( photosynthesis rate , soil conditions , etc ) .
The results will be used to parameterize a newautotrophic respiration component of the CASA ecosystem model , and to test how well the model predicts the balance of sources of heterotrophic respiration on seasonal to interannual timescales .
Predictions of the CASA model will be further tested across regional gradients spanning ( 1 ) a climosequence and ( 2 ) a suite of sites from tropical forest to tundra .
We will use atmospheric records of seasonal variation in C isotopes ( 13C at the global network sites and 14C in atmospheric CO2 at Point Barrow , Alaska ) as a global test of the CASA model 's ability to determine the seasonal to interannual exchange of C between northern hemisphere terrestrial ecosystems and the atmosphere.Intellectual merit .
Separating the components of ecosystem respiration is one of the fundamentally important research challenges in ecosystem science .
This activity will use new tools , in particular , innovative use of the radiocarbon tracer in measurements and models , to develop process level understanding of C fluxes at selected Ameriflux sites.Broader impacts .
This work will advance fundamental understanding of how terrestrial ecosystems influence the global carbon cycle , and will improve projections of future atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide by showing how heterotrophic respiration will respond to changes in temperature and moisture .
Our program to educate students through a short course in radiocarbon at the W.M .
Keck Carbon Cycle Accelerator Mass Spectrometry facility will train the next generation of scientists in the applications of radiocarbon to study land and ocean C cycling .
The objective of this research project is to develop a post-processing technique to planarize curved freestanding thin film microelectromechanical systems ( MEMS ) devices by means of controlled exposure to a neutral ion beam .
The method works by ( 1 ) affecting a thin highly stressed layer in the first few seconds of ion beam exposure through atomic rearrangement near the surface of the film ; and , ( 2 ) removing initially stressed material in the film after several additional minutes of ion beam exposure .
These effects can be combined in a controlled way to offset the initial relaxation curvature in the micro-mirror .
MEMS micro-mirrors are important components in several next-generation optical communications devices .
Freestanding MEMS micro-mirrors are often fabricated in a layer-by-layer process before being released from a host substrate ; through-thickness dimensions may be as small as one micron or less .
Once these thin structures are released , residual stresses due to processing are relaxed by transverse curvatures large enough to render the devices optically useless .
The program includes both theoretical and experimental work .
Using analytical and numerical models , the effects of various processing parameters will be studied ; experiments will be carried out to test these parameters , and the quality of the resulting planarized mirrors will be characterized .
This US-Hungarian collaborative project between Lajos Horvath and Piotr Kokoszka of the University of Utah and their Hungarian partners , Istvan Berkes and Endre Csaki of the A. Renyi Institute of Mathematics in Budapest , examines several statistical and probabilistic problems concerned with the detection and analysis of nonstationarities of various types of stochastic processes .
Emphasis is on careful analysis of the rates of convergence of the statistics of interest and on the properties of the associated permutation and bootstrap procedures .
Junior researchers from the University of Utah also participate.The joint research plan includes an investigation of change point procedures and the properties of unit root tests , that are to be developed based on resampling and subsampling methods .
These are fundamental questions associated with the detection of time series .
Results may have practical applications in economics and the financial sector by leading to useful derivations of properties of CUSUM procedures and GARCH models .
For example , findings may improve models for stock returns that can be refined to accommodate infinite error variance .
This statistics research project fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling experts in the United States and Central Europe to combine complementary talents and share research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence .
9731607 Pollock This cooperative research project between Professor John Pollock , Department of Biological Sciences , Carnegie-Mellon University , and Professor Philip Batterham , Department of Genetics , University of Melbourne , focuses on the molecular genetic analysis of normal and mutant visual system development of Drosophila melanogaster .
The U.S. and Australian researchers and their laboratories bring complementary expertise to this study image analysis and tissue culture in Pollock 's laboratory , and molecular and genetic expertise in Batterham 's laboratory .
The research plan involves a multifaceted attack on the role of played by the lozenge locus in the progressive recruitment and differentiation of cells in the developing eye .
This research should provide further understanding of how eyes develop and also how lozenge influences the development of smell and taste .
It will also provide a platform for the training of young researchers in an international setting .
This project examines the seasonal variation in the nature of the organic carbon deposited on continental margins .
The flux of organic carbon reaching the seabed can be quantified by using particle traps or by modeling seabed burial and regeneration rates , but the quality ( i.e. , its lability ) has been difficult to assess on continental margins because of co-deposition with old refractory carbon from marine and terrestrial systems .
Bomb Carbon-14 ( C14 ) is a useful tracer of recently produced marine organic matter , but this signal is masked in continental margin particle ? trap samples and surface sediments by the older and refractory carbon that is re-suspended and reworked from shallower marine deposits .
Surface deposit feeders in continental margin systems have been shown to sequester the labile fraction of the total organic flux reaching the seabed as a result of their selective ingestive and digestive processes .
Therefore , the body tissues and the gut sediments of these benthic fauna can provide a record of the labile material reaching the continental margin seafloor .
Initial C14 data indicate that the body tissues of surface depositing feeders are enriched in this radioisotope by 100 to 300 per mil relative to the surface sediments in which they live and feed .
Based on mass ? balance C14 calculations , the labile component may comprise only a few tenths of a percent of the total organic matter in the surface seabed , yet the surface deposit feeders exhibit C14 signatures in their body tissues ( +20 to +80 per mil ) dominated by the local bomb ? produced signal .
Thorium ( Th ) data from continental margins suggest that as much as 50 % of the recently deposited organic matter on the continental margin sea floor may pass through the guts of deposit feeders prior to microbial degradation or burial .
Therefore , C14 measurements on benthic fauna can provide a unique tool for assessing the lability of organic matter reaching the seafloor and for tracking the fate of this material in the benthic food web .
Many existing diagenetic models treat organic matter regeneration by microbes and deposit feeders as a batch process with a single carbon degradation constant for the bulk organic matter .
The C14 data clearly show that ingestion of organic matter and digestion of this material are very selective processes .
The C14 analyses from the California Borderland and the Antarctic continental margin have shown the utility of this approach for documenting variations in the organic carbon lability of surface sediments.Drs .
DeMaster and Smith will expand the initial studies to enable assessment of seasonal variations in the quality of organic carbon deposited on the seabed .
Particle ? trap samples , benthic ? faunal tissues , gut samples and surface sediments have been collected during 6 cruises to the California Borderland and 5 cruises to the Antarctic continental margin covering the major seasonal variations in organic carbon supply .
Funds are requested for making 150 C14 analyses ( and complementary C13 , N15 , and C/N measurements ) on these samples so that a time series quantifying the nature and flux of organic matter reaching the seabed can be determined .
They will assess not only seasonal variations in the nature of particle selection and digestive selection processes for organic matter , but also the changes in these processes as a result of feeding strategy ( epibenthic surface deposit feeders , vs. subsurface deposit feeders vs. head ? down subsurface deposit feeders ) on the seafloor .
A systematic and global re-occupation of select hydrographic sections will be conducted with the objective of quantifying changes in storage and transport of heat , fresh water , carbon dioxide ( CO2 ) and related parameters .
The program is in support of the CLImate VARiability and predictability ( CLIVAR ) and Carbon Science Programs , and is a component of a global observing system for the physical climate and carbon system .
By integrating the scientific needs of the carbon and hydrography/tracer communities , major synergies and cost savings will be achieved .
In addition to efficiency , a coordinated approach will produce scientific advances that exceed those of having individual programs .
These advances will contribute to the following overlapping scientific objectives Data for Model Calibration , Validation and Model Based Synthesis ; Carbon System Studies ; Heat and Freshwater Storage and Flux Studies ; Deep and Shallow Water Mass and Ventilation Studies ; and Calibration of Autonomous Sensors .
A joint study of the ocean carbon cycle and circulation will help identify critical areas where potential changes in ocean circulation could have serious consequences for future anthropogenic uptake .
Global warming-induced changes in the ocean 's transport of heat and freshwater , which could affect the circulation , can be followed through long-term measurements .
The sections proposed consist of approximately two meridional and two zonal lines in each ocean , for a total of 10 sections over 6 field years .
The core measurements include hydrography ( CTD , salinity , oxygen , nutrients , L/ADCP , Underway T , S , pCO2 , bathymetry , navigation ) , carbon system ( DIC , pCO2 .
TAlk , pH , DOC , DON ) , and transient tracers ( CFCs , tritium/3He ) .
In addition to the collection of the data , quality control measures will be routinely carried out by providers of reference-quality data .
Post-cruise data updates , distribution , and archive will be managed by groups with separate funding .
The field work will be integrated with a larger international effort to monitor the ocean 's response to climate change.Broader Impacts The results will be disseminated broadly to enhance scientific and technological understanding .
The program is based on the fundamental concept that data collected belong to the community , and are available to the community at large rather than being proprietary for the investigators involved in the project .
The data policy proposed will be stringent and geared towards rapid and open dissemination , and with a clear structure for all data to undergo thorough quality control .
Such an ambitious goal requiring this degree of openness has not been tried on a large scale before .
The program benefits to society include the collection of a high quality data set , and use of the data to assess climate change .
The global program will provide full water column data of climatically significant parameters with decadal coverage .
These data will be used to assess climate change by quantifying the uptake and storage of anthropogenic CO2 by the ocean , and contributing to an understanding and models of the processes that control the uptake and transport of CO2 into the ocean 's interior .
Since these are likely to be the only systematic observations below 2000 m , they will be used to document long term trends in ocean warming , and heat and freshwater fluxes .
The data will be a resource for model calibration of the climate system .
The proposed program will promote training and learning .
It will serve as a community resource for training and entraining graduate students , postdoctoral scientists , and new scientists .
Funds are budgeted in the lead proposal for graduate students , post-docs , and young , non-seagoing scientists to participate in each cruise .
The large annual flux of organic carbon from land to the ocean largely disappears in the sea .
Reasons for this loss are not clear .
Under this award , the PI will examine abiotic and biotic aspects of the lability to loss of riverine particulate organic matter .
Work will focus on the Mississippi , as it demonstrates the clearest loss of particulate organic material of any North American river upon deposition in the ocean .
Photochemical experiments will follow up on initial work showing significant dissolution of particulate organic matter subjected to solar levels of radiation .
Interactions with metal cycling will be studied , as will a variety of other physicochemical variables .
Biochemical lability will be explored via enzyme hydrolyses and bacterial incubations .
Seasonal patterns will be examined , as will be the influence of deposition in freshwater environments .
The NSF Workshop on Learning and Approximate Dynamic Programming is proposed to take place on April 8-10 , 2002 , in Playacar , Mexico .
The technical focus of the workshop is to address one common cross-cutting problem how do we do our best , using learning-based approaches or the equivalent , to develop general-purpose designs to try to maximize the sum of expected utility over future time , in a nonlinear stochastic environment , without just simulating the entire future ? An important goal of the workshop is to bring people in diverse areas to unify their efforts to tackle some important problems .
The workshop is therefore highly interdisciplinary , and the invitees are world leaders in machine learning , control systems theory , and neural networks .
The technical program is intended to create opportunities for participants to carry on discussions and to form teams for their future work .
This award provides support for a cooperative agreement for the operations and maintenance of the U.S. National Ice Core Laboratory , hereinafter called NICL a government-owned facility for storing , curating , and studying ice cores recovered from the ice-covered regions of the world .
NICL provides NSF- and USGS-funded investigators with the capability to conduct examinations and measurements of ice cores while preserving the integrity of these cores in a safeguarded environment .
NICL fosters the utilization of these cores for scientific research by handling inquiries from scientists interested in obtaining samples of ice cores , by making inventory listings easily available through electronic distribution , by acting as an information resource to the scientific community and by improving current technologies for ice core analysis in accordance with the needs and requirements of their client base .
NICL is located at the Denver Federal Center in Lakewood , Colorado and is housed administratively within the USGS Office of the Central Regional Geologist , Geologic Discipline .
The railroad industry played an important role in industrialization in the nineteenth century .
The industry is characterized by high fixed costs but relatively low variable costs .
Today , with the increased level of congestion on national highways and the rapid development in automation and computerization , the potential of the railroad industry is growing again in the service sector of the United States economy .
While research on railcar management , such as minimization of the total empty car miles , is very extensive , allocation of the cost incurred from empty miles to a loaded trip , which is an important pricing problem in freight transportation , has not received adequate attention .
The existing cost distribution schemes to allocate empty miles to loaded trips do not seem to explicitly take into account the gain and loss incurred in cooperation and , as a result , do not ensure the fairness in all situations .
With the rapid development in information technologies in recent years , cooperation at various levels has already become a key factor to success for many service sectors .
The objective of this research is to develop a cost-allocation scheme of empty car movements for a large-scale network with many participants .
In specific , the cost-allocation scheme to be developed will reflect the level of participation in cooperation , the costs generated before and after cooperation , and the benefits obtained by each participant due to cooperation .
The specific research approach adopted in this study is based on game theory .
We will also incorporate the network flow theory of vehicular traffic into the study to characterize the costs incurred at various level of cooperation participated by a subset of participants .
The advantage and disadvantage of the proposed pricing scheme will be studied under different operation settings , strategies and objectives .
Though the proposed research is conducted in the context of the railroad industry , the cost-allocation scheme developed in this study can be applied , with some modifications , to other service sectors such as commercial fleet management , supply chains , and public transportation systems with timed-transfer between different modes .
The objective of this proposal is to evaluate existing off-the-shelf sensing technologies and launch an exploratory research that will lead to a new class of low-cost micro-electro-mechanical sensors uniquely suited for health monitoring of civil structures .
This one year exploratory project will include two phases .
In the first phase , we will perform a comprehensive literature survey on the available off-the-shelf sensors that could be potentially used for health monitoring of civil structures .
The comparison will be made against sensors ' cost , sensitivity , drift , dynamic range , size , weight , etc .
This phase of research will be carried out in a close collaboration and consultations with leading experts in the field of health monitoring of civil structures .
The result of this study will be a review paper on the state-of-the-art sensor technologies for structural health monitoring of civil structures which will be prepared and submitted to a journal for publication ( the results will be also reported at the relevant NSF workshop ) .
In the second phase , we will start preliminary development , design , and fabrication of prototype MEMS sensors that will meet the identified in Phase 1 performance requirements .
Our approach will be based on a fundamentally new micro-fabrication technology that utilizes the processing of low Young 's Modulus polymers , deposition of thin film dielectric coating , silicon surface micromachining , silicon bulk micromachining , and integration of Febry-Perot interferometeric techniques .
The first version of the sensor prototype will be attempted by the end of this one year exploratory project .
The background material gathered during this one year exploratory project will be used as a basis for a full three year proposal on development of novel sensors uniquely suited for civil engineering applications .
This project involves a three-year research program to study the exchanges of carbon dioxide between the atmosphere , ocean , and terrestrial biosphere , and the processes that govern them .
Spatial and temporal variations of isotopic tracers in the atmosphere that contain information about the sources and sinks of carbon dioxide are being investigated .
The effort involves the use of the Simple Biosphere model that describes these processes on land and has been successful at predicting variations in carbon dioxide on local , regional , and global scales when coupled to an atmospheric model .
New inversion methods to estimate carbon fluxes are being developed and tested using synthetic data produced by the Community Climate System Mode at the National Center for Atmospheric Research .
The sensitivity to transport is being investigated using a suite of transport model response functions produced in a model intercomparison study .
The Olin-Yale-Bayer New Haven Public School Science program of the New Haven Public Schools demonstrates an ability to assemble scientists from diverse disciplines to work with students and teachers on K-12 science projects .
The program began six years ago as a partnership among seven schools -- it now encompasses more than forty schools in New Haven .
It is a comprehensive program with multiple components that align goals with outcomes .
Students learn the scientific method and associated skills by interacting with scientists ; the scientists train participating teachers .
Students are provided with authentic research opportunities , where teamwork is promoted and self-esteem is enhanced as a result .
Older students are able to get academic course credit for their work .
This program serves a significant number of minority students .
As a result of program activities , student test scores in science have risen .
The program has produced a network of mentors that are provided with training and support .
More than 130 volunteer mentors participated in the 2000-2001 program .
In the 2001 Connecticut science fair , thirty-four projects were based from this program -- those projects involved eleven mentors and forty-eight students ( 58 % minority ) , seven of whom were medallists and ten of whom received special awards .
Black carbon ( BC ) , the product of incomplete combustion of fossil fuels and biomass , has been increasingly formed and released to the environment for the last century .
Presently , it is not possible to quantify ( a ) the rate of BC burial in the oceanic margin sediments ( where most of the OC is buried ) , ( b ) the size of the BC reservoir in seawater , nor ( c ) riverine fluxes of BC to the sea .
Consequently , it is not possible to ascertain how important BC is to the global carbon cycle .
Under this award , the PIs address the following questions ( 1 ) What is the contribution of BC burial relative to the organic carbon burial in the Gulf of Maine ?
( 2 ) How has the input flux of BC to the region 's bed sediments changed in the past century ?
( 3 ) What is the inventory of BC in coastal seawater off the Northeast United States and what temporal and spatial variability does this reservoir exhibit ?
( 4 ) What are riverine inputs of BC to the Gulf of Maine and how do they vary seasonally ?
( 5 ) Can we identify the major sources of BC ( e.g. , fossil fuel combustion-produced soots , biomass-derived chars ) for coastal seawater and sediment of the Gulf of Maine ?
In addition to measurement of the abundance of BC in various samples , the approach taken includes field sampling of water and sediments , and a variety of analytical measurements including 234Th/238U disequilibria in water and unsupported 210Pb in sediments , carbon isotopes in BC and specific compounds as well as with key marker compounds ( PAHs ) , and BC analyses in radiometrically dated sediment cores collected from within and beyond the Gulf of Maine .
ABSTRACTThe dynamics of soil aggregate formation and stability have profound implications to understanding and enhancing C sequestration in soil .
Soil microaggregates are particularly crucial to long-term sequestration because they protect C against decomposition , resulting in much longer residence times for C. However , the reasons why organic carbon in soil microaggregates has such long residence times is not well understood .
The goal of this research is to determine the structural and chemical bases of soil microaggregate formation and stability .
This goal will be accomplished by investigating the internal surface morphology of microaggregates and the distribution of C within microaggregates , as well as the nanoscale organomineral associations underlying microaggregate structure and stability .
The evolution of these features will be examined in a series of soils representing agronomic management systems that affect C accumulation ( till versus no-till , conventional versus organic ) , as well as land-use options for enhanced C storage ( prairie restoration , forage management systems ) .This proposal focuses on microaggregates ; however , the value and significance of the proposed research will be leveraged by collaborations with several investigators who are working on the evolution of soil aggregates at the same field sites .
Their participation links the results of our study to quantitative and qualitative changes in carbon storage , as affected by management practices .
Conversely , our process-level insights will provide a mechanistic explanation for the changes they observe in accumulation or loss of soil carbon under different agronomic systems or land use options.Hypotheses relating aggregate structure to C accumulation and management practices will be tested using multiple state-of-science techniques including ( 1 ) N2 adsorption to determine the accessible surface area within microaggregates and assess whether exposed surfaces are organic or inorganic , ( 2 ) Small Angle Neutron and X-Ray Scattering to characterize the surface area and size distribution of the total porosity , and , using contrast matching techniques , determine the accessibility of internal porosity to microbes , exocellular enzymes , and nutrients , ( 3 ) Scanning Electron Microscopy to visualize intact microaggregates and help interpret N2 adsorption and scattering data , and ( 4 ) Scanning Transmission X-ray Microscopy that allows for collection of X-ray spectral data to evaluate the chemical composition of intra-aggregate OM and identify the presence of inherently recalcitrant molecules , or show preservation of labile compounds .
Data from all four techniques will be interpreted in the context of a fractal model of pore space geometries.By comparing differences in the mechanisms influencing microaggregate formation and stability , coupled with information from collaborators on the size and dynamics of soil carbon pools , the emerging patterns will be broadly relevant to identifying major mechanisms controlling rates of carbon transfer in soils .
This enhanced understanding will provide a scientific basis for developing effective management strategies to enhance C sequestration in terrestrial systems , which is one of the major goals of the Carbon Cycle Science Plan .
Specifically , the proposal focuses on process-level studies to define and quantify key mechanisms for carbon transformation and retention in soil.The project will integrate research and education through participation of a student and postdoctoral fellow .
Their scientific perspectives will be further broadened and enhanced by their interactions with our diverse group of collaborators .
The students ' experiences in this project will position them to be leaders who will make major contributions to the long-term effort to understand the global carbon cycle .
The service sector is the largest and a fast growing sector of the US economy accounting for 80 % of the Gross Domestic Product ( GDP ) .
Specifically , warranty and repair services form a major component of the manufacturing and retail industry and there has been a rising trend to outsourcing the warranty services .
This provides an opportunity for the original equipment manufacturer ( OEM ) to improve turnaround times by using the core competencies of the vendors specializing in repairs and maintenance .
However , it also poses downward risks in terms of customer satisfaction , particularly in cases where poor experience in repair services may translate into future lost sales .
The investigators plan to explore the following main issues faced by the OEMs .
( 1 ) Contract The original manufacturer 's contract with the service provider could be based on a fixed or variable fee per repair , or a lump sum amount of money per customer for the duration of the contract or other combinations .
The contracts could have quality of service requirements associated with it .
The OEM also has to determine how many service providers to contract with and whether or not to treat all of them in an identical fashion .
Furthermore , the vendors of warranty services typically compete among themselves for the outsourcing business from the OEM .
The OEM needs to understand the implication of this competition while designing contracts .
( 2 ) Allocation How should the OEM allocate its customers to the different service providers ?
One commonly used approach is to perform static allocation of customers based on costs , proximity , etc .
Another approach is to route the customer ( in need of service ) to an appropriate service provider based on the current workload of all providers .
A third option is to differentiate the customers based on priorities and treat them accordingly .
While performing the allocation the manufacturer needs to balance the cost benefits of allocating more jobs to less expensive service provider with the service delays customers may experience when there is congestion at a service provider.Motivated by interaction with the PC industry , the investigators plan to model and optimize the contracts and allocations .
The investigators strongly believe that this research will provide novel qualitative insights on effectively outsourcing warranty and repair services .
In addition , the investigators plan to develop fast solution methods that can handle industry size problems and can provide a real-time decision support for managers .
The abrupt flooding of the Black Sea in 5700 BC submerged wide coastal areas and human settlements .
This catastrophic event and the environmental changes it would have caused must have influenced the progress of the agricultural revolution in the Near East and Europe .
Apparently well-preserved archaeological sites pre-dating this flooding have recently been identified along the submerged ancient coast of the Black Sea .
These underwater sites could shed new light on economic transformations of human society at the time of the spread of agriculture into Europe .
Geologic evidence of the rapid infilling of the Black Sea basin received support when an ancient beachline was found during our deep water archaeological survey near Sinop , Turkey in 1999 .
Bathymetry of the Black Sea floor off the Turkish coast identified a rolling river valley along a 12 mile wide submerged coastal plain .
One hundred sonar anomalies ( called targets ) on the sea floor were identified by sonar and examined by remote video .
Of these , four were ancient or historic shipwrecks .
One sonar target ( no .
82 ) was identified as a potential site of human habitation on the basis of its distinctive outline and size .
Site 82 , located under 95 m of water , is composed of large ( 1 x 1 m ) slabs of limestone in a regular rectangular outline in an area 15 x 6 m. Preliminary testing in 2000 indicated that the surface of Site 82 is covered with approximately 7 cm of modern sediment .
A sediment sample taken from the site had charcoal , seeds , and an elevated phosphate content consistent with submerged archaeological sites found in other areas of the world .
Archaeological investigations are being coordinated at the University of Pennsylvania .
The Turkish authorities have granted a permit to further investigate this site in 2003 .
A grant from the National Science Foundation will allow mapping , sampling and archaeological excavations at this site , well below the depths at which divers can work .
The methodologies for robotic excavation are experimental and are being developed in a collaboration between archaeologists , engineers and oceanographers expressly for this project .
A new ROV which will have the capabilities to carry out archaeological investigations robotically is being built at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute .
Approximately two weeks will be spent on-site aboard the NSF ship USS Knorr , which is scheduled to be in the Black Sea in July , 2003 .
The proposed research at Site 82 will include 1 ) fine scale mapping ( to a resolution of 1 cm ) , 2 ) core sampling of sediments on- and off-site , 3 ) small scale excavation using the robotic vehicle , and 4 ) conservation of the site and of samples recovered .
The submerged Black Sea coast appears to be a uniquely well-preserved Neolithic landscape , unmodified by any subsequent human occupation .
Site 82 in its geographic setting offers us unusual potential for understanding the key relationship between human history and environmental change .
Results of the investigation at Site 82 should provide detailed information about the ancient economy and culture of the Black Sea region prior to the flooding , The associated oceanographic studies should provide answers to questions concerning the nature and rapidity of environmental change at a critical period in the transformation of societies of the Near East and Europe .
The robotic research tools being developed for this investigation will open new possibilities for the study of submerged surfaces , applicable in any shallow or deep water environment .
Manufacturing and service enterprises invest significant resources in the design and operation of factories and warehouses .
If properly executed , the physical configuration of these facilities can simplify the flow of material and products .
If poorly executed , it can lead to severe inefficiencies , high operating costs , and poor quality .
Over the years , much attention has been focused on effectively planning the layout of manufacturing and logistical facilities .
In contrast , the design and planning of retail facilities has been given little attention despite the importance of the retail sector to the overall economy .
Retail layout problems differ from manufacturing/logistics layout problems in several significant ways ( 1 ) the objective of retail facilities is to maximize sales rather than to minimize travel time or material moves ; ( 2 ) customer demand is both highly variable and unpredictable ; ( 3 ) customers often augment an initial shopping list with impulse items that they encounter in their sojourn through the facility ; ( 4 ) retail facilities are essentially self service facilities ; ( 5 ) and except for checkout , customers are an integral part of the service mechanism.The goal of this research is to develop a framework for a quantitative approach to the design of retail facilities .
Our activities are focused on modeling customer demand , characterizing customer flow , and formulating suitable optimization problem ( s ) , including specifying an appropriate objective function and constraints for both the physical layout of customer paths and the sequencing of product families in the facility .
We intend to focus on non-traditional layouts that we believe may significantly outperform traditional aisle-based layouts commonly found in many retail facilities .
While this research is exploratory in nature , it will build on the long history of research in layout for manufacturing facilities .
Moreover , we believe this research has the potential to extend operations research techniques to an important economic sector that has been overlooked in the past .
Additionally , this research will open a new area for teaching facility design .
It will provide the foundation for introducing retail facility layout into facility design courses , which are common core courses in industrial engineering curricula .
Cognitive Neuroscience of Category LearningAbstractWith National Science Foundation support , Drs .
Gluck and Poldrack and colleagues will conduct a three-year investigation to test two hypotheses about the roles of the basal ganglia and medial temporal lobe , and their interaction , in human category learning .
They will test these hypotheses using a combination of functional magnetic resonance imaging ( fMRI ) and studies of patients with damage to either the basal ganglia ( due to Parkinson 's disease ) or to the medial temporal lobe ( due to anoxia or other causes ) .
The first hypothesis to be tested is that the basal ganglia are particularly important for learning based on trial-by-trial feedback , whereas the medial temporal lobe is more important for observational learning in the absence of feedback .
The second hypothesis is that the engagement of these two regions during category learning is modulated by the structure of the category that is being learned .
For example , some categories are largely determined by single features ; for example , most animals with a beak are classified as birds .
Other kinds of categories require integration of information across multiple features .
We will test the hypothesis that the medial temporal lobe is crucial for learning categories based on combinations of features , whereas the basal ganglia are important for learning categories based on single features.The topic studied in this project is categorization , oneof the most important acts of human cognition .
Categorization is the recognition that various individual objects can be classified into larger groups that resemble each other in some way .
Research in cognitive psychology has provided a set of sophisticated models for how humans learn new categories .
However , little is currently known about how these operations are achieved in the brain .
Most of our current knowledge comes from studies of patients with brain disorders .
In particular , patients with Parkinson 's and Huntington 's diseases have trouble learning some kinds of new categories , though they are able to learn other kinds of categories .
These diseases affect a set of deep brain structures known as the basal ganglia , and their impairment on some category learning tasks suggests that the basal ganglia may be critical for category learning .
However , the exact role of the basal ganglia is unknown .
Whereas patients with Parkinson 's and Huntington 's diseases are severely impaired at learning some new categories , patients with amnesia following damage to the medial temporal lobe ( including the hippocampus ) are only subtly impaired at category learning .
Initial neuroimaging studies have shown that this region is deactivated when normal individuals are learning new categories , suggesting that it is not involved .
Furthermore , imaging studies have shown that that activity in the medial temporal lobe and basal ganglia during category learning is negatively related Individuals with more activity in one region tend to have less activity in the other .
These findings suggest that these two regions may interact during learning , but the nature of this interaction is unclear at present.These studies have important implications , both for the basic understanding of category learning and for the understanding of the brain systems involved in such common disorders as Parkinson 's and Alzheimer 's diseases .
Most importantly , the results of these studies will provide stronger constraints on theories of human category learning that are currently possible using behavioral measures alone .
OCE-0245278Recognizing the need for international coordination of ocean carbon observations , the SCOR-IOC Advisory Panel on Ocean CO2 and the IGBP-IHDP-WCRP Global Carbon Project have initiated a collaborative Pilot Project to ( 1 ) gather information about on-going and planned ocean carbon observation activities , ( 2 ) identify gaps and duplications in ocean carbon observations , ( 3 ) produce recommendations that optimize resources and highlight potential scientific benefits of a coordinated observation program , and ( 4 ) promote the integration of ocean carbon observations with appropriate atmospheric and/or terrestrial carbon activities .
The information gathered through this collaborative process will be posted on a new Web site devoted to making the information accessible to scientists and policymakers worldwide .
The first activity of the Pilot Project will be a workshop to bring together individuals from different countries who make and use ocean carbon observations , to discuss coordination of underway pCO2 measurements and repeat hydrographic sections , and begin discussions of how these observations can contribute to ocean carbon modeling and research activities .
This proposal is to fund the partial or full expenses for 50 individuals to participate in the workshop and to disseminate the results .
This symposium will bring together about thirty leading thinkers and policy makers in several related areas of cyberinfrastructure for science , including scientific collaboratories , grid computing , and e-science environments .
The goal is to bring together international representatives of these movements and communities to better create mutual awareness and understanding and to accelerate research , development , and deployment of these new environments to support science .
A related objective is to articulate both the technical and social/organizational prerequisites for success in these endeavors .
This nascent movement has profound implications for science education , for education and research in the humanities and for the future of the entire higher education enterprise .
This proposal is one of three proposals to each plan participation in a new multi-university I/UCRC that aims to promote a research program of interest to both industry and universities on the analysis of multiphase phenomena .
This new multi-university center will be able to have a broad impact on the industry through having each member 's resources being enhanced by those of its partners which are also being recommended to receive a planning grant .
The three partners , of which this is one are the Michigan State University , University of Tulsa , and University of Akron.The proposed Center 's goal is to focus on tackling the sophisticated challenges of computational multiphase transport phenomena which are of importance in the automotive , biochemical , chemical , food , mining , petrochemical an pharmaceutical industries.The new center will focus on challenging problems in- Multiphase turbulent flows -Multiphase materials processing , - Multiphase mixing- Next generation filtration based on nanoscale fibers , and multiphase separations .
Carbon nanotubes have the potential to contribute substantially to many aspects of nanoscience including the enabling of new technologies such as molecular electronics , miniaturized sensors , and unique materials .
Carbon nanotube ( CNT ) field emission electron sources are of particular interest because of their unique physical , electrical , and chemical properties .
The stability and reliability of these sources is governed by the chemical composition and morphology of their surface .
This research project will correlate the field emission characteristics of carbon nanotubes with the chemical composition and morphology of the nanotube surface .
The chemical and morphological composition will be investigated at the atomic level using the Imaging Atom-Probe , a technique that provides atomic resolution , morphological imaging , and the chemical identification of surface and near surface species .
The resulting information will provide , for the first time , a correlation between fundamental CNT emission processes and details of surface morphology and chemical composition.The program will impact the way CNT characterization is performed in the future and facilitate the incorporation of CNT sources into practical devices thereby impacting nanoelectronics , vacuum microelectronics , and molecular electronics .
The program also presents a unique opportunity for blending the educational experience of minority students at the University of New Mexico with nanoscience and technology by acquainting a culturally diverse student population with a scientific program that complements on going research at Sandia and Los Alamos National Laboratories .
DMS-0245606Vogan , David A.AbstractTitle Arthur 's Conjecture , Spectural Theory , and Analytic Number Theory in Higher RankAbstract .
The proposal concerns two problems with applications toautomorphic forms .
The first problem is in representation theoryit is a conjecture in local harmonic analysis that ismotivated by taking Arthur 's conjectures together with resultsof Burger , Li and Sarnak .
This problem is of interest as aquestion in representation theory ; it also offers a testingground for Arthur 's conjectures and affords the possibilityof a better understanding of the automorphic spectrum .
Thesecond problem is to study analytic number theory in the contextof automorphic forms on groups of higher rank .
The dream goal ofthis is a better understanding of higher moments of L-functions , but there are a number of easier and concrete problems , such asthe development of large-sieve inequalities , whose solution wouldalso have immediate consequences for analytic number theory .
The project concerns two questions in the field of `` automorphic forms .
'' This is a relatively new field of mathematics , guided by the Langlands program -- it seeks to establishconnections between certain ( apparently ) far-separatedareas of mathematics .
These connections have allowed work inautomorphic forms to have a significant impact in other fields.Many cryptographic algorithms -- necessary for secure communicationover the Internet -- are based onvery subtle properties of prime numbers , and underlyingmany of these algorithms are difficult results from analytic numbertheory and automorphic forms .
Another applicationof automorphic forms has been the construction of `` Ramanujan graphs '' -- these are graphs with remarkable connectivity , and have hadapplication to communication networks and to theoretical computerscience .
The questions under consideration will deepenour understanding of automorphic forms .
In additionto the type of application just discussed , these questions lie at the intersection of different fields ofmathematics , and will encourage collaboration between expertsin these different fields .
This project will investigate novel thermodynamic and structural properties of atoms and molecules deposited ( adsorbed ) on single-wall carbon nanotube ( SWNT ) bundles and other surfaces .
Nanometer-size , low dimensionality systems are at the forefront of research on new states of matter .
SWNT bundles and other uniform substrates have made possible the fabrication of one- and two-dimensional ( 1d , 2d ) forms of matter by adsorption of atoms/molecules on their surface .
Heat of adsorption , heat capacity and X-ray scattering measurements are used to study several systems ( a ) 1d helium , expected to remain in a single fluid phase down to absolute zero , ( b ) 1d molecular hydrogen , which may remain fluid to very low temperatures , ( c ) 1d and 2d crystals formed by Ar , Kr , and Xe , ( d ) 1d and 2d oxygen expected to show a crossover from 2d to 1d magnetic properties , and ( e ) quantum effects on the 2d phases of helium isotopic mixtures .
SWNT bundles show promise for hydrogen storage , a matter of high technological importance addressed in this program .
Participating graduate and undergraduate students learn a broad range of modern experimental techniques that position them well for future employment .
Nanometer size , low dimensionality systems are at the forefront of research on novel fluid and solid states of matter .
This experimental work focuses on measurements of the one- and two-dimensional ( 1d , 2d ) properties of simple gases and molecules deposited ( adsorbed ) on single-wall carbon nanotube ( SWNT ) bundles , and the 2d properties of helium isotopic mixtures adsorbed on very small flat surfaces .
Thermal and X-ray measurements characterize the phases and phase changes of the adsorbed substances as a function of temperature and density .
Fascinating novel systems are 1d helium which should remain in a single fluid phase at all temperatures , 1d molecular hydrogen which may remain fluid to very low temperatures , 1d and 2d Ar , Kr , and Xe which show solid structures being formed on the bundles , 1d and 2d oxygen with possible crossover from 2d to 1d magnetic properties , and the 2d properties of helium isotopic mixtures and their pronounced quantum effects .
Bundles show promise for hydrogen storage , a matter of considerable technological importance .
Participating graduate and undergraduate students acquire an array of modern experimental skills that position them well for future employment in any sector .
Abstract for Yan DMS-0245526The proposed project focuses on a series of interrelated problems in enumerative and probabilistic combinatorics .
In recent years deep and unexpected connections have been seen between algebraic combinatorics and probability theory , in particular , stochastic processes .
It is the primary objective of the investigator to explore such connections and to develop new methods and techniques based on algebraic-combinatorial principles , as well as analytic methods of probability and random processes .
The project focuses on four main areas .
The first is to apply the theory of branching processes and stochastic analysis to the enumeration of combinatorial objects , and to analyze the distributive asymptotics for families of random structures , including random trees , random forests , random sequences , and various random walks .
The second is to investigate the enumeration of statistics with an Airy type oflimit distribution .
The third is to study the algebraic properties and the applications of sequences of polynomials in enumerative combinatorics , which would extend the classical theory of binomial enumeration .
Finally , several problems on geometric random graphs and various combinatorial games will also be investigated.This research is in the general area of combinatorics .
One of the goals of combinatorics is to find efficient methods for arranging , enumerating , and manipulating discrete collections of objects.The proposed research addresses these goals with a combined algebraic and probabilistic approach .
There are far-reaching applicationsto other areas of pure mathematics , including algebra , analysis , number theory , statistics , and topology , as well as to areas of applied sciences such as computer science , electrical engineering , and management science .
Continuing research in combinatorics and its applications will contribute advances in bioinfomatics , internet traffic routing , network communications , and operations research , which would bring significant benefits to industry and society .
This award is for partial support for two graduate students doing thesis research under the PIs supervision .
There are two topics under consideration .
One centers on the development of new and efficient separation algorithms to identify components in functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging brain data .
The second concerns a new algorithm for inverse problems with a sparcity constraint .
DMS-0245600Sapir , Mark V.AbstractTitle Asymptotic and algorithmic properties of groupsThe PIs propose to study asymptotic and algorithmic properties of groups.The topics include a torsion free non-amenable finitely presented groupwithout free non-abelian subgroups , a finitely presented infinite torsion group , Dehn functions of groups including Dehn functions of residually finite and Metabelian groups , isoperimetric functions of aspherical manifolds , residually finite hyperbolic groups , structure properties of hyperbolic groups ( is everytorsion-free hyperbolic group free-by-finite exponent ?
) , n-dimensionaldiagram groups.Algorithmic properties of groups have been a subject of intensive studysince the beginning of the 20th century ( Dehn and Tietze ) .
Novikov , Booneand Higman showed deep connections between logic ( especially the theory ofrecursive functions ) and group theory .
A more recent work by Gromov andothers showed a connection between algorithmic and asymptotic properties ( especially isoperimetric and growth functions ) of groups and the relatedtopological objects .
The PIs found even more intimate connections betweencomplexity of algorithms and asymptotic properties of groups .
In particular , they have characterized groups whose word problem is in NP in terms of Dehnfunctions and Higman embeddings , found an NP-complete group , etc..
The PIspropose to further study these connections , and their applications to someoutstanding Burnside-type problems .
In particular , they propose to useHigman embeddings to construct finitely presented torsion groups and in thestudy of Dehn functions of metabelian groups .
Another direction of theirresearch deals with connections between geometry and structure of groups .
Inparticular , they propose to study the class of finite dimensional diagramgroups , for dimension greater than two which , they believe , include a large class of groups acting `` nicely on cubical complexes .
Structural properties of hyperbolic groups will also be under investigation .
DMS-0245387Skinner , ChristopherAbstractThis proposal investigates connections between L-functions andGalois representations .
More precisely , the investigator connectsspecial values of L-functions of varieties or motives to the orders ofassociated Selmer groups .
In joint work with E. Urban the investigatorshowed that if the L-function of a modular form of weight 1 vanishes toodd order at its central critical point then the rank of the correspondingSelmer group is infinite .
The investigator is exploring extensions torepresentations of higher dimension and to pursuing a `` mod p '' version of this result relating the p-adic order of the L-value ( iffinite ) to that of its Selmer group .
Additionally , the investigator iscompleting work in collaboration with M. Harris and J.-S. Li thatconstructs p-adic anti-cyclotomic L-function for automorphicrepresentations on unitary groups U ( n ) and which makes progress towardsanti-cyclotomic `` main conjectures '' for these groups .
Doing so involvesrelating these L-functions to congruences between endoscopic and stableautomorphic forms on U ( n ) .
The investigator is also pursuing an approachto the `` main conjecture '' for modular forms on GL ( 2 ) by studying thearithmetic of certain Eisenstein series on U ( 2,2 ) .Number theory is often divided into two branches analytic and algebraic.The investigator is studying the connection between many seeminglyunrelated objects from these two branches .
The primary focus of the firstbranch is the study of L-functions - complex functions built ofnumber-theoretically interesting data ( such as the Riemann zeta functionwhich is built out of the prime numbers ) .
The other branch focuses onalgebraic objects such as class groups .
But it is now expected that theseare not unrelated values of certain L-functions at special points ( generally integers ) should be the orders - the sizes - of certain of thealgebraic objects .
Such connections are generally very signifigant.One instance was a crucial ingredient in Andrew Wiles ' proof of Fermat'sLast Theorem , for example .
Drawing from the theory of automorphic forms , the investigator 's work establishes new instances of these conjectures.This work is motivated by the fact that special values of L-functionsappear in the fourier coefficients of modular forms .
PI Sun-Yung Alice Chang/ Paul Yang , Princeton UniversityDMS-0245266AbstractThe analytic part of the proposal is concerned with two questions concerning nonlinear differential equations arising from conformal geometry .
The first is to formulate a general notion of weak solutions for a family of fully nonlinear equations containing the equations to prescribe the symmetric functions of the Weyl-Schouten tensor , and to provide criteria for removal of singularities of such equation .
This would open the way to find solutions to these equations by a more traditional variational method .
The second is to find Sobolev inequalities for fourth order equations that arise in conformal geometry in dimensions three and four .
The geometric part of this proposal is concerned with applications of our recent work in prescribing the second symmetric functions of theWeyl-Schouten tensor on a four-dimensional manifold to the diffeomorphisms classification of a class of four-dimensional manifolds , as well as applications to the study of Kleinian groups in higher dimensional manifolds.This proposal is concerned with new methods to solve a family of nonlinear differential equations that is associated with conformal geometry in which the primary data is the knowledge of angle measurements .
The ability to solve these equations gives us new numerical invariants that will eventually allow us to classify these geometries in three and four dimensions a subject that is of wide interest in the geometry and topology community .
The differential equations are highly nonlinear and appear among a family of such equations that have only recently yielded to a geometric approach .
Such development will generate a set of new tools to analyze the structure nonlinear partial differential equations a subject also of wide interest in general .
EIA-0245231Michael KellerStanford UniversityDigital Government SGER LOCKSS Government DocumentsThis proposal will explore the usefulness and appropriateness of a distributed peer to peer network-based storage and archiving technology for the long-term ( decades ) maintenance of Federal records .
Using a system known as LOCKSS , the PI will collaborate with the Government Printing Office and its group of 55 Federal Depository LIbraries .
The hope is to provide new options to the current model of a central archieve with off-site backups .
Principal Investigator Geoffrey Mason Proposal Number DMS - 0245225Institution University of California-Santa Cruz ABSTRACTLie Theory is a central discipline in modern mathematics and plays a key role in diverse areas such as harmonic analysis , differential geometry , number theory , algebra and mathematical physics .
The co-principal investigators will utilize funding to continue and enhance the Western regional workshop series Lie Groups , Lie Algebras and their Representations which is devoted to Lie Theory and which has been flourishing for over ten years.The series of weekend meetings that are the main focus of the workshop will provide a unique opportunity for graduate students and junior researchers to become acquainted with research and researchers in the western part of the US who work in Lie Theory .
The co-principal investigators will encourage and facilitate collaborative research , especially between junior and senior researchers , and provide opportunities for advanced graduate students to confer with experts at other universities .
PI Lawrence Thomas , University of VirginiaDMS-0245511 ABSTRACTThe investigator will work primarily in two areas of mathematical physics .
1 ) Models in Non-Equilibrium Statistical Mechanics .
A typical model consists of a chain of coupled anharmonic oscillators ( or a non-linear field ) coupled to two linear fields .
The linear fields are given Gaussian distributed random initial conditions with , in general , different covariances corresponding to different temperatures .
Depending on the couplings , the resulting equations for the oscillators or wave equations for the non-linear field are stochastic ordinary or partial differential equations .
The goals of the research include showing the existence of invariant measures for the system of equations and elucidating the steady state thermodynamics of these measures , e.g. , that there is heat-flow and entropy production .
An ultimate goal is to understand the thermodynamic limit of such measures.2 ) Dynamics of an Elastica and Related Models as Problems in Wave-Maps .
An example of a dynamical elastica is a curve ( e.g. , a thin but massive inextensible wire ) , moving in space , having both a non-relativistic kinetic energy and an internal potential energy given by the integral of the curvature squared over the curve .
The Euler-Lagrange equations governing the elastica include a wave equation , 4th order in the spatial variable , and an auxiliary equation for the curve tension .
The elastica equations are closely related to those for wave-maps such as the Landau-Lifshitz equations of ferromagnetism , and their respective analyses share commonalities such as use of the Hasimoto transformation .
In previous work with a collaborator , the investigator has shown local existence for the elastica for initial data in suitable Sobolev spaces .
His immediate research goal is to resolve the question of whether there is global existence or whether in some circumstances the elastica actually tears itself apart in a finite time.General description 1 ) Models in Non-Equilibrium Statistical Mechanics .
Non-equilibrium but steady state phenomena are familiar and ubiquitous in nature .
Good examples are steady heat flow through a material body with fixed thermostated temperatures over its surface , and an electrical current through a wire with different fixed voltages at its ends .
Surprisingly , there is no satisfactory mathematical theory or formalism for describing these phenomena , at least none starting fromthe level of particles and fields making up the material body .
By contrast , equilibrium phenomena , for example the specific heat and the magnetic susceptibility of a material and their dependence on temperature and pressure , are well understood from the microscopic point of view .
The investigator will consider specific models described by differential equations , the goals being to provide formalism for non-equilibrium phenomena and to develop the mathematical tools necessary to apply it .
2 ) The Dynamics of an Elastica and Related Models as Problems in Wave-Maps .
A dynamical elastica can be thought of as a thin inextensible wire ( a curve ) which is massive and which can flex in space .
The differential equations of motion for the elastica are closely related to those for wave-maps , which describe , for example , the dynamics of ferromagnetic materials or more exotic sigma-models from particle physics .
The investigator is studying the long-time behavior of the elastica with the objective of determining whether it vibrates indefinitely or can in fact tear itself apart in a finite time .
A better understanding of the elastica behavior and related problems would be useful in applied settings including continuum mechanics and even the mechanics of large biological molecules .
This proposal is to plan for a new partner to join an existing mutli-university I/UCRC that aims to promote a research program of interest to both industry and universities on supply chain management .
This existing multi-university center will be able to have an even broader impact on the industry through having its existing resources enhanced by the addition of this partner and the other two partners that are also being recommended to receive a planning grant .
Three partners , of which this is one are the University of Florida , Lehigh University and the University of Minnesota.The proposed Center 's goal is to focus on tackling the sophisticated challenges and interdependencies of logistic and distribution , simplifying and advancing communications systems by identifying new circuits and new circuit-design techniques as well as new methods in systems design and information technology.The new partners will bring to the existing center , a focus on- Demonstrating the value of operations research in business operations- Enabling industry partners to harness available technologies , and - Creating new practice-based research and education models for engineering curricula .
The proposal deals with an area of significant need and by assembling these three additional institutions into an already strong team , their added breadth and depth enhances the prospects for success .
The existing institutions in this Center , together with the three new ones will be a national resource on this topic .
This project will investigate and develop a Biologically Inspired Intelligent Fault Management System using Artificial Immune System ( AIS ) technologies on top of a Neural Network - Fuzzy Logic ( NN-FZ ) structure to actively manage power distribution system faults , including diagnosis , prognosis , and data mining .
The proposed approach can answer the challenges of discovering new fault diagnosis knowledge based on the dynamic operating environments , in addition to providing accurate fault diagnosis and prognosis .
The NN-FZ technology will be used to aggregate information collected from sources such as SCADA system , circuit database , fault database , etc. , to perform fault diagnosis and prognosis .
Then an AIS algorithm will be used to guide the NN-FZ to learn , absorb , adapt , evolve and improve the fault diagnosis performance based on existing information such as the distribution system 's network topology , operating conditions and weather conditions , and depending upon newly acquired information , such as new faults and operating conditions .
This proposed system can data mine the existing outage database and explain heuristics about the fault diagnosis and prognosis process as preferred by operators and engineers .
It can disseminate learned information to other power distribution centers , thereby preventing the reoccurrence of learned problems .
This system would revolutionize the Fault Diagnosis process for power distribution systems , to significantly increase system reliability and reduce operation costs .
The proposed activities and architectures are not only limited to power distribution system , but are also applicable to other industries such as communication networks and transportation system that are large scale nonlinear system with uncertain operating environments .
This collections track project is developing a new educational interface called Ceph School supported by CephBase data .
In Ceph School , Cephalopods are being used as the model organisms for a number of reasons .
Cephalopods ( squid , cuttlefish , octopus and nautilus ) are very different from animals that students typically study .
They actively , colorfully , and dynamically illustrate all major concepts in biology and are bio-medically important .
They are animals that students are naturally curious about .
Ceph School is providing full access to all of the current data and also modifying and expanding it by creating an entirely new age/knowledge appropriate interface composed of eight new modules .
The goal , using cephalopods as model organisms , is to have students understand basic principles in biology ( modules 2,4,5 & 7 ) , observe the methodology of scientific research and become familiar with cephalopods ( modules 1 & 6 ) , and also provide student and teacher-specific support ( modules 3 , 5 & 8 ) .
These modules are enhanced with web cameras , videos and links to additional data .
From a distance , students observe living animals in real time , use interactive maps to explore their geographical distribution and habitats , learn about their anatomy , physiology and behavior , search appropriate bibliographies , locate world experts , and observe science in action .
Additionally , teachers have a quality , data rich tool to help their students get excited about science .
A regional group of motivated and innovative teachers , who are familiar with theresearch center , supply a pedagogue 's view of the initial design and appearance of the site , and provide critical assessment of the usefulness of the modules and finally suggestions for improvement and refinement.This system is structured to provide a type and quality of standard information ( Textley and Wild 1996 ) that is customized for high school and university students .
Ceph School begins with the already successful OBIS ( Ocean Biological Information Systems ) compliant CephBase website ( www.cephbase.utmb.edu ) , recognized twice in Science ( 282587 and 2852027 ) .
The site includes complete taxonomy for all living cephalopods , from phylum to subspecies .
It includes over 1000 images and 70 video clips depicting behavior , taxonomic traits and predator and prey data .
It also includes a directory of all the world 's cephalopod workers , a frequently asked questions database , a searchable scientific literature database containing 4688 papers on cephalopods , geographic distribution maps made in real time , and finally a powerful web interface that allows interoperability with other OBIS databases ( i.e. , FishBase , Kansas Geological Survey and Species 2000 ) .
This is a collaborative project with Carnegie Mellon University ( Award No .
0226219 ) .The investigators are creating a proof-of-concept demonstration of a new type of digital library for physics teaching .
The project brings together several long-standing research projects in digital video libraries , advanced distance learning technologies , and collaboration technologies , and nationally known experts in physics pedagogy and high-quality content.The project builds on Carnegie Mellon University 's Informedia Digital Video Library ( see NSF Award Nos .
9411299 , 9817496 , and 0085834 ) , which is addressing the problem of information extraction from video and audio content , and synthetic interviews of master physics teachers .
Synthetic interview technology creates an anthropomorphic interface into video of a person responding to questions .
Synthetic interviews based on videos of several master physics teachers will allow teachers to converse with knowledgeable experts about their classroom techniques and about how those techniques are related to contemporary issues in physics teaching .
Teachers will also be able to create personal synthetic interviews , which , in addition to providing a resource for other teachers , can become a virtual , anytime , anywhere tutor for students.The project aims to produce a state-of-the-art system through which teachers can interact , both virtually and directly , with experts in physics teaching , cooperate to help each other become more effective teachers of physics , and develop advanced courses for their students .
The stress related to prolonged aquatic submergence is the focus of this research proposal .
This work attempts to quantify levels of circulating catecholamines in chronically submerged freshwater turtles and will provide useful background information for future studies on diving in turtles.Freshwater turtles typically employ one of two well-documented physiological homeostatic mechanisms for surviving submergence in water for long periods .
First , 'thin-skinned ' turtles ( softshells ; Apalone spinifera , musk turtles ; Sternotherus odoratus , and painted turtles , Chrysemys picta ) that overwinter in streams , ponds , or shallow lakes , rely on extrapulmonary mechanisms of gas exchange to provide sufficient oxygen for metabolism and carbon dioxide excretion .
In essence , these turtles can remain aerobic throughout the winter by exchanging oxygen and carbon dioxide via extrapulmonary gas exchange sites that include the buccal cavity , the cloacal bursae , and the thin skin near the proximal aspect of the limbs .
When metabolic demand for oxygen is low , ( e.g .
during winter submergence when water temperatures are near freezing ) oxygen demand can be met by these comparatively 'low capacity ' gas exchange sites .
Another strategy for operating cellular machinery during long-term aquatic submergence is to burrow into the anoxic substrate ( mud ) and produce ATP anaerobically .
This second strategy presumably minimizes access to turtles by predators and ectoparasites , but usually results in severe metabolic and ionic disturbances .
Nevertheless , turtles that dive underwater for long periods , and employ either strategy , experience apnea .
Thus they do not breathe using their lungs , and the success of either strategy depends upon the interactions among abiotic factors ( i.e .
water temperature , dissolved oxygen and carbon dioxide levels , and perhaps water pH ) and biotic factors related mostly to anatomical correlates ( i.e .
thickness of skin , presence of cloacal bursae , cardiovascular and respiratory adjustments ) .
Apnea , with or without hypoxia or anoxia is a stressful experience and catecholamines are released into the blood stream as a result .
Release of stress hormones in response to 'stressful ' situations can be adaptive , but chronic production and secretion of stress hormones ( epinephrine and cortisol ) usually leads to immunosuppression , morbidity and ultimately , mortality .
This research will track the changes in stress hormone concentrations during normoxic and hypoxic/anoxic exposure.These data on stress hormone levels will be interpreted in the context of additional data concerning the effects of long-term submergence on cardiovascular function ( including systemic , pulmonary , gastrointestinal , and renal blood flows ) in freshwater turtles , which will be gathered in these studies as well .
This project will produce qualitative and quantitative data that will be instrumental in helping biologists understand aspects of cardiorespiratory physiology in diving reptiles , particularly turtles .
The goal of this project is to bring together young and experienced college faculty to encourage scholarship in the teaching of computational linguistics .
This would take place in a workshop on Effective Tools And Methodologies For Teaching Natural Language Processing And Computational Linguistics to be held during the annual conference of the Association for Computational Linguistics on July 7 , 2002 in Philadelphia , PA .
The workshop will enable new and prospective computational linguistics faculty to learn from their peers and to share resources related to teaching NLP and CL .
Not Available ABSTRACTThis award provides partial support for travel of young researchers ( advanced graduate students , post doctoral researchers and very new faculty ) to attend the First International School and Conference on Nanoscale/Molecular Mechanics to be held in Maui , Hawaii from May 12-17 , 2002 .
The school will be held two days prior to the conference .
A panel of distingushed lecturers has been selected to make presentations .
Many of the pioneers in nanoscale mechanics will make presentations at the conference .
Not Available The proposal is to establish a US-EU/DELOS working group/study panel on Information Extraction from Digital Libraries .
The working group will meet over the next year to discuss and evaluate fruitful joint activities and research paths for collaborative activities in this general topical area .
The EU component of the effort is funded and managed by the DELOS Forum , a major organizer of digital libraries research and planning activities in Europe .
DELOS receives support from the Information Societies Technologies ( IST ) 5th Framework Programme of the European Commission .
This effort continues the planning and assessment activities begun by an earlier NSF-EU working groups ' process .
In their final report An International Research Agenda for Digital Libraries , delivered in Brussels in October 1998 , increased levels of collaboration and interaction was seen as critical to building multi-lingual , multi-national digital libraries .
The objective of the new working groups , of which this is one , is to define a research agenda on a specific topic and identify areas and activities for cooperation between EU and US researchers .
The efforts of this particular group take the next step in the planning process by assessing future directions for research and resource development related to information extraction from digital libraries .
Continued single-year , high-precision ( 0.2 % ) measurements of carbon-14 ( C-14 ) from tree-ring samples will be made in order to provide a continuous record from AD 998 to 1954 .
The record will be examined for evidence of high-energy solar flare events , and hard gamma-rays associated with Supernova RX J0852.0-4622 ( ca .
1300-1350 ) .
It will also be possible to determine if the 11yr and 22yr cosmic ray modulation cycles extend through the Oort and Wolf Minima .
The search for correlations between changes in solar activity and climate change will continue to be emphasized .
Participation in the construction of INTCAL 03 will also be supported .
National Science Foundation support will allow Robert Kopperl , an anthropology graduate student at the University of Washington , to finish his dissertation research testing the proposition that prehistoric hunter-gatherers had an impact on their prey populations which in turn affected their diets and ultimately their social organization .
The geographic focus is on Kodiak Island , Alaska , where the native Alaskan Alutiiq hunted sea mammals and fished for over 7000 years before Russian colonization .
For almost a century , anthropologists have proposed that intensive salmon harvesting played a large role in the development of socially complex cultures on the north Pacific coast , but no cause for this intensification has been determined .
This dissertation research tests the hypotheses that harvest pressure on local prey populations caused a dietary shift from larger-bodied sea mammals to a greater focus on smaller-bodied marine fish and salmon , and that this shift preceded , and therefore may have caused , the development of social complexity on Kodiak Island .
Testing these hypotheses will involve a combination of analytical techniques , including the examination of animal bones recovered from several archaeological sites spanning over 6000 years for evidence of prey choices and butchery and carcass transportation patterns by the occupants of the sites .
Additionally , paleoclimatic data for the region during this period will be examined as another agent that could have affected prey populations .
Finally , changes in hunting and fishing tool technology will be explored for the role it may have played in changing prey preference .
Support for these hypotheses can be seen in declines in the proportion of sea mammal bone to fish bone over time in archaeological assemblages , as well as changes in age structures of the individual animals that the bones represent , depending on the behavioral habits of each species .
Changes in the parts of carcasses deposited at each site will be informative of the distance foragers traveled from the site to hunt and fish .
Finally , how long ago these changes occurred will be correlated with the known dates of the first evidence of cultural complexity on Kodiak Island , approximately 1500-2000 years ago .
The oldest of the archaeological sites examined is very poorly dated ; therefore charcoal and bone samples recovered from the site will be submitted for radiocarbon dating .
This research combines zooarchaeological , paleoclimatic , and artifactual data for the first analysis of its kind with this time-depth , examining prehistoric subsistence changes on Kodiak Island from shortly after initial colonization over 7000 years ago until Russian contact .
Testing the proposition that human or climatic impacts on prey populations had a causal role in the development of cultural complexity will offer a theoretically grounded starting point to further investigate the development of prehistoric social complexity on the coast .
Additionally , this research has implications for future management of certain animal populations by examining their interactions with humans in the past .
This collections project builds on the earlier successes of the web site , www.eskeletons.org , anddramatically expands the range of content at the site , the degree of student interactivity with thematerials , and the amount of student interaction with each other .
New laser scanning equipmentalong with dramatic improvements in existing high resolution X-ray computed tomography technologies allows the inclusion of species of a much smaller body size than those initially posted at the site , with the completion of the scans accomplished on a much faster timetable .
This site provides students with a more complete understanding of the range of primate diversity and facilitates a great diversity of lab exercises.Additions to the site include 1 ) an expansion of the range of content including additional species , larger samples of particular species , and case studies that illustrate specific points , including forensic studies , and the option for researchers to post their datasets , 2 ) multiple entry portals that are age-specific and include separate portals for grade , college , and Gray learners , a collaboratorium link to serve as a clearinghouse for bringing together classrooms and instructors from different parts of the country , a series of tools and exercises that examine a variety of biological concepts and topics , 3 ) expansion of the current self-quizzingfeature and the incorporation of prepared curriculum materials , PowerPoint presentations , andclassroom exercises that can be downloaded by instructors for use in the classroom , 4 ) 3-D hard copy printouts to explore the use of anatomically accurate models at various scales as teaching tools , with a special emphasis on identification kits and comparative anatomy , 5 ) versions of the web site that can be downloadedfor remote use on laptops and handheld PDAs , and 6 ) conformity with the NSDL Core Integration effort .
The establishment of a new Industry/University Cooperative Research Center ( I/UCRC ) at the College of Engineering and Applied Sciences at Arizona State University focuses on Telecommunication Circuits and Systems for the advancement of the next generation of telecommunication systems .
The objective of the Center is to establish a cooperative research center for Arizona State University researchers and industry partners to work together on the advancement of integrated circuits and systems for telecommunication by identifying new technologies that will enable system-on-a-chip communication devices.The I/UCRC will comprise three major initiatives Research , Internship , and Curriculum development .
Research initiatives will provide consortium partners a complete spectrum of expertise in Telecommunications , RF Design , Wireless and Wireline communications , optical electronics , and analog/digital integrated circuits .
The research roadmap of the center will be conceived and executed by the Center industrial Partners and will be monitored and evaluated by the Industrial Advisory Board .
The project is proposed by a partnership between SUNY-Brockport , Rochester City School District ( RCSD ) third largest in New York state with the lowest achievement scores and Brighton Central School District ( BCSD ) with similar gaps among underrepresented groups yet with one of the highest overall achievement rates in the state .
Additional partners are the Shodor Foundation and The Krell Institute .
The primary goal for the partnership is to improve student outcomes in mathematics and science in grades 7-12 by creating a multi agency approach for the recruitment and professional development of mathematics and science teachers .
A Computational Mathematics Science and Technology ( CMST ) approach to learning science is employed in which students and teacher are engaged in fieldwork , laboratory experiments , mathematical modeling , computer simulation and visualization .
CMST employs math models to describe physical phenomena therefore bringing a new perspective about the usefulness of math as a tool in real life .
The method is designed to make science and mathematics concepts more easily comprehensible .
A Challenge program incorporating CMST is providing tools and motivation for 200 , grades 7-12 students , under the supervision of participating teachers .
The approach in addition to teaching science concepts is designed to promote teamwork , collaboration and new strategies for problem solving .
A component of the comprehensive professional development program for mathematics and science teachers is a four-week summer institute each year serving a total of 240 teachers .
In addition there is a master 's degree program for 30 teachers .
Preservice education programs at SUNY Brockport are being revised and new courses are to be introduced to assure an improvement in the quality quantity and diversity of the new teacher workforce .
The objectives of this Small Grant for Exploratory Research ( SGER ) are to 1 ) Create general probability models for key quality characteristics of a subset of the taxonomy of manufacturing processes .
The selected taxonomy will specify the following classifications ( a ) the type of Geometric dimensioning and tolerancing ( GD & T ) requirements for form and location .
( b ) the type of manufacturing process and product material ; and ( c ) the type of inspection device .
The models will be chosen based on their accuracy and generality in representing the realistic behavior of process outputs ; and 2 ) For each of the general probability models , define an appropriate summary statistic that incorporates the engineering requirements and the random nature of the process behavior .
Having studied the output from various materials , processes measurement devices , complex GD & T acceptance zones , and normal/non-normal univariate/multivariate distributions in the first part of this research , we plan to define a set of statistics useful for summarizing performance and setting goals .
Summary statistics will be chosen based on their distributional properties and will be used to define sample size requirements and critical acceptance values useful for supporting vendor relations and setting process performance goals .
The results of this research will constitute a complete methodology for capturing and summarizing the behavior of inspection data ( i.e.. probability ' models ) .
Data sets provided by industrial partners ( Intel .
Motorola .
and Simula Safety Systems ) will provide the modeling environment and validation of research .
The project 's deliverable will be a published catalogue of probability models that can be directly mapped to form and location GD & T requirements , manufacturing processes , materials and measurement systems for a subset of entries in the manufacturing taxonomy .
Should this research prove successful .
a follow-on project will be prepared for more categories in the taxonomy .
In total , this research project is expected to have usable models for industrial decision-making , planning , and analysis as well as the theoretical contributions in performance summary statistics .
0226764McIntireThe Second Joint Meeting of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society ( EMBS ) and the Biomedical Engineering Society ( BMES ) occurs in Houston , Texas , October 23-26 , 2002 .
The technical program of the meeting includes the 3 mini-symposia of Biomedical Optics , Magnetic Resonance Imaging , and Terahertz Bioimaging and Biosensing Applications .
Funding is being provided to support the participation of 8 young investigators who will give featured 30-minute presentations in the special mini-symposia on the topics New Technologies in Biomedical Optics , Recent Advancces in Magnetic Resonance Imaging , and Terahertz Bioimaging and Biosensing .
The intellectual merit of the 3 mini-symposia is high the topics chosen for discussion represent new areas of investigation in Biomedical Optics and Imaging and are to be described by new investigators at the forefront of their respective fields .
The mini-symposia will add significantly to the scientific quality of the Joint Conference , which currently represents the largest professional forum for Bioengineers worldwide .
The information presented will have broad impact in the fields of biosensors , BioMEMS , medical imaging , and the areas of applied research that depend on such emerging technologies .
Each recipient of support is expected to submit a report outlining their exciting new findings and their scientific experiences at the Conference .
This Small Grant for Exploratory Research , in part motivated by events of September 11 , 2001 , will undertake preliminary background study of the building code enforcement process when challenged by the need to rebuild rapidly in the face of natural or man-made disaster .
The goal is to prepare for further research on improving the quality and efficiency of code enforcement services in emergency situations by gathering data and documenting system flows .
The researchers will also identify opportunities to streamline the permitting and code enforcement processes while continuing to protect the interests of the community .
A minimum of two municipalities will be used as case studies in accomplishing the analysis .
This project consists of four tasks aimed at improving the breadth , depth and quality of the Digital Library for Earth System Education ( DLESE ) The first task is an assessment of the collections and is being done by systematically comparing the scope and balance of the actual DLESE Collection with the collection desired by the DLESE community , as expressed through searches on the DLESE Discovery system , in community meetings , and through the DLESE Scope statement .
For the existing collection , data are being compiled on learning context ( grade level ) , topic , type of learning resource , cost to user , geographic distribution of resources focusing on a particular locality , and temporal distribution of resources focusing on a particular slice of geologic time .
For the desired collection , data area being compiled on search and browse requests made through the Discovery System .
Changes over time of both the existing collection and the desired collection are being documented and compared .
The second task is building on a prior NSF award supporting a resource gathering effort in Earth and environmental science to build a starter-collection with at least a few resources of interest to a wide range of potential DLESE users .
This collections gathering effort is guided by the Collections Assessment , focusing on filling identified gaps or thin spots in the collection , seeking to avoid a lumpy collection rich only in those areas collected by specific interest groups .
The third task is the cataloging of resources and is being done by the group responsible for the GeoRef catalog of professional literature in the geosciences .
The fourth task is the further development and implementation of the Community Review System .
The DLESE Community Review System solicits web-based feedback from educators who have used the resource with their learners , and combines it with expert reviews to evaluate resources against a set of seven selection criteria .
The scope and breadth of the Reviewed Collection is increasing and Reviewed Collection resources are being showcased .
Indices based on information gathered during the review process are being shared with potential resource users , along with editor 's comments and teaching tips contributed by users , via an NSDL-style annotation service .
In addition to building the DLESE Collection , this project is contributing to the broader NSDL in several areas of collection development practice and research methodologies for collections assessment in a digital world , incorporation of collections assessment into digital library evaluation , identification of resources proven effective in challenging and learning and teaching situations , implementation of a community-based review system , and use of an annotation system to disseminate information about educational resources .
Significant co-funding of this project is being provided by the Division of Earth Sciences in the NSF Directorate for Geosciences in recognition of the importance that this collection and related activities have for K-12 teachers and undergraduate faculty .
This Collections project by the Journal of Chemical Education ( JCE ) is creating the JCE Digital Library .
Four major new collections are being added to the considerable digital material already available at JCE Online , the JCE Web site .
Each collection is being carefully reviewed to ensure that it contains materials that are scientifically accurate .
Reviewers are also requiring that materials embody pedagogy supported by the chemical education research literature .
Each collection is being categorized using keywords , organized by curricular level , and correlated with textbooks to allow quick and easy access by teachers from high school chemistry through graduate-level courses.The four collections being developed includeDigiDemos-digitized text , graphics , sound , and video of chemical demonstrations that are enabling teachers to learn the most effective demonstration techniques , the latest important safety and waste disposal information , and exemplary pedagogy involving demonstrations.Computer Algebra Systems-documents for Mathcad , Mathematica , Maple , or MATLAB are being designed to help students learn mathematically intensive aspects of chemistry.JCE WebWare-a collection of Web-deliverable animations , simulations , calculations , and other pedagogically useful items are being incorporated into classroom presentations to promote discussion and interaction among students , and to provide new insights through graphic and other non-traditional means.Resources for Student Assessment-Web-deliverable materials including homework , quiz , and examination questions with anytime anywhere , feedback and tutoring based on student responses , and a variety of new approaches to student assessment are being developed.JCE is providing a paid staff to organize volunteer efforts in order to maintain and to update content , and will continue to do so after the project ends .
JCE also is providing a well-established review process involving more than 4,000 reviewers , many of who already review digital materials .
Finally , feature columns edited by volunteers with expertise in specific content areas and who can serve as nuclei for additional collections materials are available once the JCE Digital Library is established.JCE is ideally suited to develop this Collection of digital materials for chemical education as it has nearly 80 years of expertise and experience in chemical education and a worldwide reputation .
JCE is where chemistry teachers from high school through graduate school look for high quality materials .
This Collection is enhancing and improving science education throughout the USA , thereby fostering better public understanding of chemistry and science and aiding in the recruitment of all kinds of students to careers in science .
Significant co-funding of this project is being provided by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the NSF Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences in recognition of the importance of a digital library for the support of the learning of chemistry .
Mathematical ACTS Achievement and Collaboration for Teachers and Students is a project that focuses an existing University of California - Riverside ( UCR ) and Jurupa Unified School District partnership involving pre-service and in-service education of teachers to an emphasis on student mastery of Algebra I content .
In this new effort , the partners will establish a spiral of instructional training for upper elementary and middle school mathematics teachers .
Embedded in a research paradigm , Mathematical ACTS will examine the main effects of preservice education , professional development and/or extended learning opportunities on student achievement in mathematics and on teacher career growth .
As the project scales up , the partners will analyze students of teachers with or without Mathematical ACTS professional development experiences , and with or without a pre-service candidate available to facilitate re-teaching.The partner school district has a student population of over 19,000 students of whom 57 % are Hispanic and 5 % are African American .
Further , the district has sizeable English Learner ( 24 % ) and Free/Reduced Price Meals ( 52 % ) student populations .
Among the secondary school mathematics teachers , only 52 % have a mathematics major or mathematics teaching credential .
Through Mathematical ACTS , partners will tackle issues of teacher credentials through 150 annual hours of training lead by district and university faculty with an emphasis on addressing gaps in student mathematical skills and mastery .
Extended learning opportunities in the classroom , after-school , and in the summer will be available for remedial and advanced students .
Research results on the scalability of reform will be disseminated in conjunction with district-wide adoption and structural changes in UCR 's teacher education program .
EAR-0226362WaychunasNanoscience and nanotechnology have emerged as major national goals as evidenced by the requested FY 2002 federal budget .
The Earth science community has clearly identified nanoscience in the environment as an emerging field ( National Academy of Sciences BROES report , Jordan et al .
2001 ) .
Earth science researchers have recognized the potential importance of studies of nanophase materials and have begun to develop specific research targets .
Accordingly , this award will co-fund ( with the National Research Council ) an invitational workshop of approximately 50 people to assess the opportunities and challenges in the field , as well as the pertinent connections between nanogeoscience and more traditional chemical or materials-based nanoscience , and write a report of no more than 15 pages in the course of a 2.5 day meeting in June 2002 at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory .
0226872BrioThis award supports the PI and graduate students from the University of Arizona in a collaboration with Mads Sorenson of the Department of Informatics and Mathematical Modeling at the Technical University of Denmark in Lyngby .
The research will focus on two physical problems .
One is the study of integrated photonic devices ; a second is the propagation of ultra short pulses and beams in nonlinear media , including air .
The problem of femtosecond light pulses in bulk media is a challenging computational problem because the high intensity of the laser pulse can cause optical breakdown of the material leading to highly nonlinear response .
Recently developed efficient parallel algorithms will be applied to the problem of modeling ultra short pulses in nonlinear media .
For the study of short pulse dynamics in photonic crystal fibers , theoretical calculations will be done to investigate supercontinuuum generation , soliton self-frequency shift , and third-harmonic generation.The combined effort of the US and Danish groups is expected to provide a much needed theoretical and numerical component to the important technologies associated with applications of ultra short pulse phenomena .
The topic area has the potential to produce revolutionary advances in the fields of communications , medicine , energy efficiency , defense , and manufacturing .
The objective of this project is to develop design and analysis tools for these highly nonlinear and complex fuel cell power systems .
We will use control theory not only for feedback synthesis , but also to reveal fundamental limits of achievable performance , and to make architectural decisions at an early stage of system design .
The tight integration of system components , and the strong interplay between electrochemistry , thermodynamics , and reactor kinetics , give rise to dynamic phenomena that can not be understood with the physics of individual subsystems in isolation .
The development of reduced-order models that capture these dynamic phenomena , and the design of feedback controllers that work in harmony with the inherent physical features of the fuel cell , are timely research directions that would dramatically improve dynamic performance .
The PI 's strong background in nonlinear control theory and ongoing collaboration with United Technologies Research Center will lead to significant improvements in transient performance for highly dynamic loads , and to reductions in the number of costly system components through rigorous analyses of design trade-offs , and advanced feedback and state estimation algorithms .
This proposal will enable participation of junior researchers in theFrontiers of Nuclear Structure Conference to be held on the campus of the University of California at Berkeley .
The conference covers a variety of topics , including nuclei under extreme conditions , and astrophysics .
The majority of the talks will be selected from contributed abstracts , which generally favors a higher fraction ofnjunior speakers compared with a program generated from predominantly invited talks .
This NSDL Services project is creating turn-key software for collection developers to manage their organizing and cataloging tasks and to create and share item-level metadata .
In addition a digital library workflow management knowledge archive is under development .
The project complements the work of the NSDL Core Infrastructure ( CI ) team as it harvests and integrates collection records into the NSDL Metadata Repository so that users may conduct in-depth searches for items across diverse science , technology , engineering , and mathematics education collections .
The impact of these services promises to have broad reach across a spectrum of educational levels .
This grant is a travel request to enable eleven US researchers to attend the VI Iberoamerican Conference on Phase Equilibria for Process Design ( EQUIFASE 2002 ) .
This meeting will be held from October 12 -16 , 2002 in Foz de Iguazu , Brazil and is being organized by Professor Marcelo Castier ( Universidad Federal do Rio de Janeiro , Rio de Janeiro , Brazil ) and Professor Esteban Brignole ( PALPIQUI , Universidad Nacional del Sur , Bahia Blanca , Argentina ) .
The purpose of the VI Iberoamerican Conference on Phase Equilibria for Process Design ( EQUIFASE 2002 ) is to share research results in the area of phase equilibrium and thermodynamics .
The conference organizers are anxious to include researchers from North America who traditionally have not attended this meeting .
This travel grant will include full funding for two young researchers and partial funding for nine senior researchers .
The proposal for this grant is a direct result of the Pan-American Workshop to Promote Collaboration in Chemical Engineering that was held in Rio de Janeiro in August 1998 .
This Targeted Research project is investigating capabilities for an innovative pen-based digital notebook to enable users , particularly students , to work and interact with NSDL 's digital materials in a personalized manner .
The main features of the system include viewing , taking notes on , annotating ( e.g .
freehand ink , post-it notes , and bidirectional fine-grained hyperlinks ) , organizing , and collaborating on multimedia documents , all with the ability to replay the temporal sequence of one 's notes in the contexts in which they were made .
Whiteboarding activities are also supported along with audio facilities to capture voice commentary digitally and anchor it to a specific document location .
The primary targeted device is a lightweight , high-resolution tablet computer used in an environment with ubiquitous wireless LAN in frequented areas ( e.g. , on a college campus ) and a WAN for other areas .
However to ensure widespread usage , the system also works on standard desktop and laptop computers .
Finally , the system includes facilities for personalized organization of documents and notes , for example folder and outline views , search , and default support for personal spatial hypertext provided by the basic annotation and linking facilities.This research effort extends Microsoft Research 's DISC project ( DIStributed Classroom ) in the areas ofcollaboration , fine-grained hyperlinking , multidocument journaling and synchronization , and documentand note organization .
In addition to partnering with Microsoft , the PI and team are working with other NSDL projects , such as Carnegie Mellon University 's Threading Information Pathways Through NSDL Video , to help integrate the system with the NSDL 's existing and future services and infrastructure .
With the capabilities of this project in hand users of the NSDL are much better able to make the available materials of NSDL their own , forming a personalized , hyperlinked portfolio from their digital library experience that supports a natural and enjoyable process of learning .
This Targeted Research project is investigating a model for integrating content from NSDL into online and web-enhanced courses in higher education .
The project 's first user community and testbed are the students and faculty at the Texas A & M Electronic Teachers College ( ETC ) .
CollegisEduprise is supplying its iLumina digital library infrastructure and its experience with metadata tagging of learning resources to facilitate the integration of Texas A & M University System learning objects into the NSDL .
Services under development include mapping of modular learning object content to teacher certification competencies in high area needs such as mathematics ; defining competency-based metadata vocabularies for these learning objects that reflects the teacher certification requirements ; and creating a Content-Packaging Tool Suite to enable faculty to select learning objects from a repository , build them into learning modules , and connect them into course-management systems or other delivery platforms .
These services are being designed and implemented in a generalizable way to enable effective integration into the NSDL and sharing with others who want competency-tagged learning materials and tools to construct learning modules from them .
Professor Bramson 's main research on stochastic processes continues to be in the areas of queueing networks and interacting particle systems .
Two major themes in the first topic are the stability of queueing networks and their heavy traffic limits .
A queueing network is said to be stable when the associated Markov process is positive recurrent .
The heavy traffic limit of a sequence of queueing networks is the diffusive limit obtained by applying the usual central limit scaling .
Results over the last decade have led to a better understanding of queueing networks , although a general theory is lacking .
The researcher plans to investigate the behavior of queueing networks under certain well-known disciplines , such as processor sharing and earliest-due-date , first-served .
Other related topics in queueing theory include dynamic scheduling in heavy traffic and the stability of self-managed models for the internet .
Interacting particle systems consist of systems of many particles that evolve according to some interaction law .
Such systems are frequently motivated by models from the physical and biological sciences .
The researcher plans to investigate models that have creation and annihilation of mass , as well the stationary measures of certain exclusion processes .
Professor Bramson 's current research is in two areas of probability theory , queueing networks and interacting particle systems .
In the first area , one studies the behavior of large systems of individuals who proceed from one server to the next , until their needs are satisfied and they leave the system .
Individuals here should be interpreted in a general sense , and may be customers waiting to be served ( for instance , at a bank or at a service counter ) , jobs in some manufacturing process ( such as the production of semiconductor wafers ) or information packets on the internet .
In practice , one is often faced with the choice of whom to serve first .
This choice can substantially affect the efficiency of a system , and sometimes even its stability .
That is , based on how good a service rule is in a given setting , the number of customers waiting in line may typically remain small over extended periods of time , or may tend to grow without bound .
Work over the last decade has shown that such systems can be unstable for unexpected reasons .
The researcher plans to continue his work in this area and investigate the stability of the network under certain well-known service rules .
The area of interacting particle systems is motivated by models from the physical and biological sciences consisting of large numbers of individuals who interact according to some rule .
For instance , individuals might be molecules moving about according to some rule or cancer cells spreading along a surface .
The behavior of these systems can depend strongly on the nature of their interactions .
The researcher plans to continue his research on certain of these models .
This project is an investigation of some of the fundamental processes behind interannual and decadal variability in the coupled ocean-atmosphere system of the tropical Pacific .
One focus of the proposed research is whether there are energetic coupled modes in different frequency bands fast - on the order of 1 year ; intermediate - the ENSO mode ; slow - a decadal mode , and whether , together these modes and their nonlinear interactions can produce some of the complex time dependence seen in the tropical Pacific .
Several approaches will be used to study the problem .
First , the linear modes of a hierarchy of different linearized coupled models will be determined .
The most complex of these models is a coupled MOM3 multi-level ocean and a multi-level spectral atmospheric model , linearized around a steady state .
The response of the linearized models to high-frequency stochastic forcing will also be examined .
The upper-ocean energy budgets of these models will be diagnosed in order to understand the dynamics responsible for each mode .
A modified version of the Cane-Zebiak intermediate model will be used to examine nonlinear interactions between the different modes .
It is anticipated that the fast coupled mode and the ENSO mode will interact primarily through the effects of zonal advection on temperature while the ENSO and decadal mode will interact through ocean thermocline displacement .
The effects of using more general stochastic wind stress and heat flux forcing ( using observed spatial EOFs with amplitudes that are white noise processes ) will also be examined .
The process modeling approach will be augmented with analysis of decadal variability in climate model output through a collaboration with Dr. Kimoto of Tokyo University ( CCSR ) .
This research is important because it has the potential to improve the physical understanding of the observed behavior of coupled ocean-atmosphere climate phenomena in the tropical Pacific and , hence , projections of climate phenomena such as El Nino .
Proposal Number CTS-0226010Principal Investigator Hrenya , Christine MInstitution University of Colorado - BoulderTitle A Computationally Efficient Approach to the Lagrangian Modeling of Bubbling BedsThis proposal is based on the assumption that there are valid scaling laws where a large bubbling fluidized bed , typical of industrial applications , can be scaled down to a bed with fewer particles ?
based on this assumption , the PI proposes to using these scaling laws to simulate an equivalent system with fewer particles and thus save significant computational cost which is typically proportional to the number of particles in a Lagrangian-Eulerian approach .
Lagrangian simulations have several advantages and will be a very powerful tool in realistically modeling particulate flows if it is made computationally more tractable .
The objectives of this work are to verify the existence of such a scaling or 'similitude ' by experiments and numerical simulations and to develop an appropriate numerical scheme for Eulerian-Lagrangian simulations .
Not Available The aim of the proposed work is to study the behavior of low regularity solutions to nonlinear wave equations .
This problem is by now well understood for generic equations .
However , most nonlinear wave equations arising in physics ( e.g. , Einstein 's equations in general relativity ) exhibit some kind of special structure which , one expects , guarantees a much better behavior of solutions than for a generic equation .
It is precisely this type of equations that the proposed research will focus on .
This subject is largely unexplored , and , until now , was considered to be out of reach .
However , recent work of the PI may hold the key to progress in this field .
The Biosci Ed Net ( BEN ) Collaborative is continuing development of a portal site and six ( 6 ) digital library collections .
The BEN Collaborative is composed of 12 professional societies and coalitions for biology education with an interest in transforming the teaching and learning of undergraduate biology .
The BEN portal provides users with seamless access to accurate and reliable undergraduate biology resources In this phase of the project activities include1 ) Enhancing the BEN portal site to increase security , the content and services offered to users , and to support the anticipated increase in contributors/users , collections Partners , and resources..2 ) Modifications to or development of the concurrent collections six ( 6 ) BEN Partners .
These Partners include American Physiological Society ( APS ) , Ecological Society of America ( ESA ) , American Society for Microbiology ( ASM ) , American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology ( ASBMB ) , the Human Anatomy and Physiology Society ( HAPS ) , and Science 's Signal Transduction Knowledge Environment ( STKE ) .
These developments and modifications are being done in a manner that is consistent with BEN and NSDL specifications .
In addition , some Partners are developing digital library features that will be adopted by other BEN Partners and useful for other NSDL projects.3 ) Increasing the number of learning objects in collections and in the BEN catalog , either through acquisition of existing collections or submissions.With prior support of the NSDL program members of the BEN Collaborative havea ) Developed one portal , two web sites , and two digital collections , including ( 1 ) the prototype of the BEN portal , http//www.biosciednet.org/portal/ ; ( 2 ) the BEN documentation site , http//www.ben.e-guana.net/ ; ( 3 ) the BEN announcement site , http//www.biosciednet.org ; ( 4 ) the ESA digital collection , http//www.ecoed.net/index.php ; and ( 5 ) the APS digital collection , http//www.apsarchives.org/main/index.asp .
In addition , the existing ASM digital collection , www.MicrobeLibrary.org , was modified for resource harvesting.b ) Six hundred and eighty ( 680 ) resources have already been harvested or cataloged from APS , ASM , ESA , NABT , STKE , and SOT .
In Cycle 2 , we expect to harvest at least another 2,500 resources from another 8 collections or sites .
These 8 collections or sites include Access Excellence , ASBMB , HAPS , Heal Education Asset Library ( HEAL ) at UCLA , Evolution and the Nature of Science Institute at Indiana University , International Association of Medical Science Educators ( IAMSE ) , the National Biological Information Infrastructure ( NBII ) , and the Human Genome Project Information Web site at Oakridge.Collectively about 10,000 monthly visitors used the digital collections or web resources of BEN Partners .
By 2004 , we expect 20,000 monthly visitors to use the BEN digital collections .
The goal of the is project is to attain a deeper molecular level understanding of the dramatic slowing down of the molecular relaxation processes ( rotations , translations ) as the temperature of a supercooled liquid approaches the glass transition temperature ( Tg ) .
This challenging problem on the nature of glass and the glass transition remains as one of the most important in solid-state physics and -chemistry .
No microscopic theory exists that captures all salient features of the kinetic glass formation process that marks the onset of non-ergodicity .
The experimental approach is unique in that it uses three laser-based spectroscopies ; single molecule ( SMS ) , photon echo ( PES ) and nonphotochemical hole burning ( NPHB ) .
The liquids to be studied are water , methanol and ethanol ( probe molecule Al-phthalocyanine tetrasulphonate ) at temperatures below and above Tg .
SMS reports on molecular rotational relaxation over a ~1-4000 second time period while NPHB and PES report on optical dephasing of probe transitions on a picosecond time scale .
A novel hyperquenching apparatus will be used to prepare the glasses at low temperatures which can then be warned to Tg and temperatures above Tg .
The above liquids will also be studied in confined spaces of porous materials ( pore sizes ranging from a few nanometers to ~ 100 nanometers ) .
Here water is particularly interesting since the non-freezable water in contact with a pore surface is a model for biological water bound to proteins .
The research will provide students with an excellent training because of the cutting edge experimental techniques to be used and because the research is both challenging and importantThis unique experimental approach employing three state-of-the-art laser spectroscopies and a novel apparatus for forming a glass by cooling small liquid droplets at a rate of a million degrees per second will be used to attain a molecular level understanding of the glass transition .
The data will provide new insights on how the motions of molecules dramatically slow down as the liquid is cooled towards Tg .
What is learned for three important liquids ( water , ethanol , and methanol ) may well lead to better glasses for technological applications .
Because the research is cutting-edge it will provide graduate students and postdoctoral researchers with an excellent training serve them well as independent researchers with an excellent training serve them well as independent researchers in an area of high technological importance .
This research investigates scalable formal methods and their combinations as a way to reduce the gap between formal methods and software practice .
These methods include domain-specific certification and runtime verification and monitoring .
Important subthemes are exploitation of domain-specific knowledge to derive efficient and scalable algorithms and decision procedures ; strength through the combined use of several lightweight formal methods ; multidimensional components to represent not only code , but alsodifferent views of the system from different perspectives ; dependability metrics based on the notion of multidimensional component , so that increases in dependability along each dimension are aggregated into measurable overall dependability increases .
Various prototypes are developed safety policy certifier for units of measurement ; coordinate frame safety certifier ; optimality state estimation certifier ; runtime verification and monitoring prototypes .
These are experimentally evaluated using the NASA-HDCP testbed.This research is expected to lead to advances in software technology and to benefit advanced education .
Novel combinations of software synthesis , certification and monitoring lead to new , powerfuldependable software development methodologies ensuring safe execution with little or no overhead .
Two graduate courses are planned .
Supported graduate students are given a solid scientific foundationand acquire invaluable experience by working closely with NASA scientists .
This award supports the Gordon Research Conference on Atmospheric Chemistry in Big Sky , Montana , September 7-11 , 2003 .
This Gordon Research Conference is one of the major meetings in this field .
In 2003 , the conference will cover a broad range of areas in atmospheric chemistry , including tropospheric chemistry - laboratory , field and theoretical studies , upper troposphere/lower stratosphere - composition , chemistry and transport , and remote sensing .
The meeting will be attended by both established researchers and young scientists , among them the participants of the preceding Atmospheric Chemistry Colloquium for Emerging Senior Scientists ( ACCESS ) , and provide invaluable opportunities for interactions between scientists in all areas of atmospheric chemistry .
This project is studying the physiology , toxicology , ecology and oceanography of toxic Pseudo-nitzschia ( PN ) species off the Pacific Northwest coast , a region in which both macro-nutrient supply and current patterns are primarily controlled by seasonal coastal upwelling processes .
The long term project goal is to develop a mechanistic basis for forecasting toxic PN bloom development along the Pacific Northwest coast and in other similar coastal regions in Eastern Boundary upwelling systems .
The objectives are being met with an integrated suite of field and laboratory studies on two 21 day cruises per year , moored bio/chem/physical sensors as well as circulation and biophysical modeling in a study area that includes both the eddy and also a typical coastal upwelling region .
The key factors responsible for high cell densities of toxigenic PN spp .
and the variable levels of cell toxicity are being investigated with on-deck incubation studies and comprehensive in situ measurements including macronutrients , micronutrients ( Fe , Cu ) , bacteria and grazer abundance as well as photosynthetic radiation , stratification and velocity shear .
Aging of blooms are being studied by following drogued patches of water both from the eddy and from a nearshore upwelling region .
Toxification of coastal shellfish are being determined using beach sampling sites maintained by the Olympic Region HAB program .
A coupled biophysical model of the region is being used to examine the potential for bloom generation in offshore eddy and nearshore upwelling regions ( e.g. , stratification , nutrient sources , strength and timing ) as well as to assess transport pathways of toxic PN to the coast under a variety of environmental and physiological conditions .
The over-availability of data and the under-availability of knowledge present a critical challenge for biological informatics in the years to come .
Clearly , effective techniques are need not only for storage and retrieval purposes , but also for mining genomic data to increase our knowledge .
However , the high dimensionality and enormous size of genomic data pose very challenging problems in analysis and visualization of the data sets .
This project investigates novel approaches to analyzing gene expression data and integrating them into biological research .
New algorithms and tools that can be used iteratively and interactively to mine the data will be developed .
The strategies include a meta data hierarchy for integration of heterogeneous data , cluster-based indexing for high-dimensional data , inter-dimensional analysis for classification , and dynamic interactive visualization for pattern analysis .
The approaches will be field-tested by biologists investigating an organism 's phenotype and genotype iterations .
The project will deliver a flexible , scalable workbench environment ready to be used for general genomic data analysis .
In addition to education development activities , the project 's impact will be enhanced by broad applications in other fields that handle large-scale multi-dimensional data sets .
A major challenge for ecologists is to understand the effects that environmental stressors have on community structure and function .
This research will determine how a novel stressor - increased atmospheric deposition of nitrogen - is altering the dynamics of the detritus-based food web associated with the northern pitcher plant , Sarracenia purpurea .
Three different types of analyses are proposed to address hypotheses related to the trophic dynamics of pitcher plan communities .
A field 'pulse ' experiment will manipulate the species composition of the food web and the source of nitrogen .
Nitrogen isotopes will be used to reveal the movement of nitrogen derived from anthropogenic sources and from prey .
A greenhouse 'press ' experiment will measure the effects of different food web structures on nutrient uptake and growth of pitcher plants .
Experimental results will be used to develop models of community assembly and of food web dynamics .
The proposed research will reveal the importance of anthropogenic stressors on co-evolved systems and contribute to a deeper understanding of the contrasting effects of top-down and bottom-up forces on the dynamics of non-equilibrial assemblages .
The research will result in general models that can be applied to other ecological communities experiencing novel stressors .
It will involve graduate and undergraduate students in supervised and independent research .
Ms. Miriam Doutriaux 's doctoral dissertation project will investigate the Inca occupation of the Collagua province , located in modern-day southern Peru .
The variability of Inca rule is a theme that has long fascinated Andean scholars .
After conquest , the Inca state generally sought to effect a balance between its own economic and political ambitions and the sociocultural and environmental conditions of different regions .
In each case , the political and economic aspects of imperial rule were mutually dependent and closely intertwined , but not inextricably so .
Indeed , similar economic interests or conditions could be accommodated with different political configurations to ensure the smooth operation of many different Inca provinces .
Under the direction of Dr. Christine Hastorf , Ms. Doutriaux will compare two areas of the Collagua province located at different altitudes and inhabited by distinct cultural groups , to understand the way in which Inca political dynamics were articulated with economic strategies in the valley , and how both were tailored to preexisting social and political arrangements in this province .
Historical documents reveal that the Collagua province was inhabited by two distinct ethnic groups , the Collaguas and the Cabanas , apparently since pre-Inca times .
The Collaguas were Aymara speakers with a pastoral orientation , while the Quechua-speaking Cabanas focused on agriculture .
According to historical accounts , the Collaguas established good relations with the conquering Incas , thereby securing their political dominance over the rest of the valley until Spanish colonial times .
On the other hand , archaeological studies of the valley 's economy suggest that Inca influence was greater in the Cabana area of the province , possibly as a result of the warmer climate and better agricultural conditions .
Until now , the different focus of archaeological and historical studies has impeded a full consideration of the variable nature and impact of Inca strategies in the province as a whole .
As part of her dissertation work , Ms. Doutriaux will do an archaeological survey of 25 sq .
km .
around the historical capital of the Cabanas .
She will analyze the settlement pattern , site organization , architectural canons , ceramic styles and artifact distributions to characterize the nature of the pre-Inca and Inca occupation there .
A comparison of this data with the results of an archaeological survey she recently completed around the Collagua capital will enable her to draw conclusions about the regional-scale dynamics of Inca imperialism.This research has the potential to shed light not only on Inca empire-building , but also on the resulting symbiotic relationship between differently empowered self-interested groups in the imperial context .
It also contributes a much-needed scholarly focus on the south-central Andes , home to the Andes ' two main culturo-linguistic traditions .
The Colca Valley 's unique combination of these Aymara and Quechua traditions in the heartland of a single province offers the possibility of new insights on the distribution of power and resources and the relationship between Aymara and Quechua groups in late prehistory.This project will serve a valuable infrastructural function through the training of a promising graduate student Virtual Ecology Experimental Tests of Evolution in Predator-Prey SystemsAlan B. BondSome of the most profound issues in biological evolution concern the selective effects of interactions between organisms , particularly the influence of predators on the color patterning of their prey .
The proposed research will study the effects of predation using a 'virtual ecology ' , in which predators hunt moth-like virtual prey whose appearance is controlled by a computer-based genetic algorithm .
When the prey are detected on the computer screen , they are considered to have been eaten .
Only surviving prey can breed to produce the next generation , so the actions of the predator , over time , influence the appearance of the virtual prey dynamically , causing it to evolve into new forms .
This procedure will be used to test hypotheses that relate prey appearance to patterns of predation .
For example , most palatable prey are also cryptically colored , difficult to detect , and highly variable in appearance .
In contrast , prey that are poisonous or distasteful tend to be conspicuously colored and to vary little in appearance .
By establishing populations of virtual moths that vary in coloration and palatability , several hypotheses that have been proposed to account for differences in appearance and variability of the prey will be rigorously tested .
The proposed research will advance our understanding of the complex dynamics involved in predator-prey interactions over evolutionary time .
It will also establish the validity of virtual ecology for studying complex evolutionary dynamics , potentially adding powerful new techniques to the scientific study of ecological relationships among organisms. -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- Michael D. GreenfieldProgram Director , Animal BehaviorDiv .
Integrative Biology & NeuroscienceNational Science Foundation4201 Wilson Blvd. , Rm 685Arlington , VA 22230 U.S.A.703-292-8421 Not Available With this award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities ( CRIF ) Program , the Department of Chemistry at Louisiana State University will upgrade a 400 MHz solid-state NMR Spectrometer .
This equipment will enable researchers to carry out research in a number of areas a ) molecular interactions of pesticides , toxics with soil ; b ) characterization of novel polymer materials ; c ) characterization of organic sorbents in sediments ; and d ) studies on the structure of fibrils formed by protein self-assembly.Nuclear Magnetic Resonance ( NMR ) spectroscopy is the most powerful tool available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules .
It is used to identify unknown substances , to characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules , and to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution .
Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research .
The results from these NMR studies will have an impact in environmental and materials chemistry and biotechnology .
Not Available This project will investigate the distribution , phylogenetic affinities and ecological aspects of ammonium-oxidizing bacteria in the Palmer Long-Term Ecological Research study area .
Ammonia oxidation is the first step in the conversion of regenerated nitrogen to dinitrogen gas via denitrification , a 3-step pathway mediated by three distinct guilds of bacteria .
As such , ammonia oxidation is important to the global nitrogen cycle .
Ammonia oxidation and the overall process of nitrification-denitrification have received little attention in polar oceans where it is significant and where the effects of climate change on biogeochemical rates are likely to be pronounced .
The goals of the studies proposed here are A ) to obtain more conclusive information concerning composition of Antarctic ammonia oxidizers ; B ) to begin characterizing their ecophysiology and ecology ; and C ) to obtain cultures of the organism for more detailed studies .
Water column and sea ice AOB assemblages will be characterized phylogenetically and the different kinds of AOB in various samples will be quantified .
Nitrification rates will be measured across the LTER study area in water column , sea ice and sediment samples .
Grazing rates on AOB will be determined and their sensitivity to UV light evaluated .
In addition , the significance of urea nitrogen as a source of reduced nitrogen to AOB will be assessed and the temperature response of nitrification over temperature ranges appropriate to polar regions will be evaluated .
This work will provide insights into the ecology of AOB and the knowledge needed to model how water column nitrification will respond to changes in the polar ecosystems accompanying global climate change .
With National Science Foundation support Dr. Christine Hastorf and her colleagues will conduct three field seasons of archaeological research on the Taraco Peninsula along the southwestern shore of Lake Titicaca in modern day Bolivia , studying the Taraco Peninsula Polity .
The international team brings together specialists in archaeology , geoarchaeology , botanicarchaeology , and zooarchaeology to conduct a coordinated investigation into the origins and development of the early and longest lived Andean state , the urban city Tiwanaku .
This large city held dominion over the southcentral Andean region for over 600 years , consolidating around ACE 500 .
To investigate the foundations of this state and their developments the researhers will test three models .
One model proposes that this development was funded by large scale intensive raised field agricultural systems controlled by an elite class .
This strategy would have gathered in a sizable surplus of staple products , used to underwrite monumental construction and public ceremonialism .
The second model posits that Tiwanaku 's power was built upon control of long distance trade in wealth and staple goods across the greater southern Andean region , which financed the centralization of power over labor that built the ceremonial center .
The third model privileges local social experimentation and strategies by which people were enticed into joining larger communities .
This will be studied by pursuing evidence for the development of nested supra-communities through local rituals and lineage development .
The Taraco Peninsula Polity was one of the first generation of multi-community groups to arise in the Titicaca Basin , emerging fully by 250 BCE .
The beginning of this sequence seems to be at 1000 BCE .
Building on their previous work at a site on the Peninsula , this field project will concentrate excavation at three additional sites .
These sites span the time phases of this political development , beginning with the earliest settlements on up to when the nearby Tiwanaku drew the populace into its urban sprawl .
From the excavations , the team will complete a series of analyses using macro , micro , and chemical analyses to provide concrete data that addresses these three models .
These analyses include 1 ) identification of crops and associated wild plant taxa to record the agricultural land use changes , 2 ) charting camelid pack animal use and evidence for the extent of long distance caravans , 3 ) sourcing and identifying highland stone , Amazonian wood , drug and medicinal plants to track the exchange patterns , and 4 ) uncovering and mapping ceremonial architecture and associated ritual artifacts to describe the elaboration of communal rituals .
The team consists of US , Canadian and Bolivian students and archaeologists , providing an important source for professional training in Bolivia while promoting international collaboration .
They also work closely with indigenous communities in building and maintaining small regional museums about their past .
There has been a recent surge of archaeological and ethnographic work in the Basin which will place the results within a larger cultural trajectory and clarify the rise and fall of large political entities in the high Andes , perhaps explaining more about long-term sustainability in such environments .
Georges Bank supports a rich fishery because ( 1 ) large portions of the bank are shallow enough that light-limitation of phytoplankton is usually not important ; ( 2 ) deep waters rich in inorganic nutrients are available for mixing onto the bank ; and ( 3 ) the Bank 's clockwise circulation can retain the planktonic stages of important fish species .
The tidally mixed front ( TMF ) is central to the productivity of Georges Bank through the processes of nutrient injection in the north and retention of larvae on the south flank .
These two regions are connected by a circulation pathway along the front in which nutrients lead to phytoplankton and zooplankton growth , creating a donut-shaped region of high production surrounding the crest .
It is suggested that the productivity of this pathway is the result of northern edge nutrient injections and is susceptible to climatic influences on nutrient supply in that region .
The overall objective of this project is to understand the processes within the TMF that sustain the biological productivity of Georges Bank and the success of the target species , cod and haddock .
This requires understanding how mixing and circulation within the TMF supplies new nutrients , supports primary production , and retain larvae .
GLOBEC dye tracer experiments have , for the first time , measured directly the near-bottom Lagrangian circulation and mixing in the TMF .
Results show that vertical mixing in the front , and the on-bank flow through the base of the TMF , are dynamically connected .
This study is examining the 3-dimensional dynamics of the TMF based on these measurements .
Models will help assess how the strength of the across- and along-isobath circulation sets time and space scales compatible with the development of cod and haddock larvae .
This project consists of a mix of data analysis and modeling activities .
First , dye dispersion data and simple shear dispersion models are being used to understand the link between cross-bank flow and vertical mixing .
Second , a finite-volume coastal ocean model ( FVCOM ) will be used to calculate the temporal and spatial structure of nutrient flux into the TMF , contrasting northern and southern flank inputs .
A coupled FVCOM- NPZ ( nutrient-phytoplankton-zooplankton ) model are being used to test the following hypotheses ( i ) Nutrient injections in the north are advected around the crest of the bank and lead to a plume of elevated phytoplankton and zooplankton production .
( ii ) The plume enriches the area of larval entrainment on the south flank .
If the above statements are true , then production in the plume can be altered by the nutrient content of source waters in the Northeast Channel of the Gulf of Maine , and these changes will affect the feeding environment of larval cod and haddock .
Finally , models incorporating the measured 3-D flow and turbulence fields are being used to examine spatial patterns of larval retention and define the kinds of environmental transitions that larvae experience during this process .
With support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation ( CRIF ) Program , the Department of Chemistry at the University of Oregon Eugene will acquire a CCD X-ray diffractometer .
This equipment will enhance research in a number of areas including the following a ) studies of organic molecules of biological and technological relevance ; b ) inorganic catalysts important in the energy field ; c ) nanoclusters for use in electronic devices ; d ) molecules that can be used as non-biological molecular motors ; and e ) new solid-state materials .
The X-ray diffractometer allows accurate and precise measurements of the full three dimensional structure of a molecule , including bond distances and angles , and it provides accurate information about the spatial arrangement of the molecule relative to the neighboring molecules .
These studies will have an impact in a number of areas , including materials chemistry , preparation of more efficient catalysts , and biotechnology .
HDCCSR Proposal 0234651 Improving test suites via generated behavioral abstractions Michael ErnstTesting is a key to detecting bugs and increasing software reliability , but generating good test suites is difficult .
This project investigates a novel technique for using behavioral differences to improve test suites .
The technique compares dynamically generated behavioral abstractions of executions and selects the more complete one -- that is , the test suite that exercises more of the program 's semantic behavior .
Whereas previous automatic techniques compare dynamic ( run-time ) behavior to the static structure and text of the program , this new technique considers behavior , which complements structural techniques and is arguably more important.The technique is applied to generating , augmenting , and minimizing test suites .
Users provide the program to be tested and a technique for generating test cases ( via a grammar , random generation , traces collected from users , or otherwise ) .
Users never need to provide a specification .
However , the technique generates a behavioral abstraction that is syntactically identical to a formal specification and that , after being checked and perhaps augmented by a human , can beused as a specification .
The efficacy of these techniques is investigated and improved , and they are applied in substantial case studies .
This project will create a network to coordinate development of biological fiber diffraction methods , particularly computational methods .
Many biological molecular assemblies are long helical structures , and have a natural tendency to form fibers .
Structural studies of these fibers are difficult ; conventional macromolecular crystallography is not usually possible .
Fiber diffraction , however , is a powerful technique for determining the structural details of such assemblies .
Activities will include development and integration of software for biological fiber diffraction , and exchange of information about fiber diffraction methods through retreats , workshops , and a public web site .
Software applications will be adapted to various platforms , integrated with the suite of programs available through the British Collaborative Computational Project for Fibre Diffraction ( CCP13 ) , and made available to the scientific community .
New software will be developed where existing software is inadequate .
The network software will be complementary to CCP13 software ; together , they will eventually cover all aspects of biological fiber diffraction .
The network will integrate fiber diffraction groups in the USA with each other and with the world fiber diffraction community , particularly with CCP13 .
This will be done through workshops organized by the core participants , including workshops at the BioCAT facility at Argonne National Laboratory , and through partial sponsorship of sessions organized by the fiber diffraction Special Interest Group of the American Crystallographic Association.Broader impact will be through involvement of undergraduates , graduate students and others in the workshops and the research , and through enhancement of infrastructure for research and education .
Newman0109086 The principal investigator and his colleagues study thestructure and function of real-world networked systems , particularly but not exclusively social networks .
An empiricalcomponent is concerned with the discovery and analysis of thestructure of networks , including networks of collaborationbetween scientists , networks of company directors , networks ofpersonal preferences , and networks of citations between academicpublications .
Studied quantities include local observables suchas transitivity and degree distribution , and nonlocal ones suchas centrality and community structure .
The investigator developsmodels to aid in the understanding of the effects of networkstructure .
Of particular interest are random graph models ofnetworks , percolation models of network resilience , and models ofepidemics taking place on social networks .
The investigatordevelops new algorithms for extracting and visualizing networkstructure , particularly the existence of communities in networksand structural properties related to network resilience , such aspath counts and centrality measures .
A knowledge of the structure of networks of acquaintance iscrucial to the understanding of how information , such as news , rumors , consumer trends , etc. , spreads through society.Similarly , networks of physical contact between people govern theway in which diseases spread .
A proper understanding of thenature and progress of epidemics is impossible without goodnetwork models .
In this project the investigator determines whatthe structure of the networks in question is , and also models theeffect of that structure on , among other things , the spread ofinformation and disease .
As well as enhancing basicunderstanding of these problems , the project points to ways inwhich network structure or dynamics can be changed in order toeither improve network transmission ( in the case of information ) or slow it down ( in the case of epidemics ) .
For diseasetransmission , for instance , it may be able to suggest effectivetargets for immunization or education campaigns to slow diseasespread .
The new data resources and analysis techniques developedcan be used to study other problems in which network-structuredprocesses arise .
Data , Information , and Recommendations Regarding Emergency Worker Safety and Health During Disaster Responses The objective of this project is to contribute to knowledge on the process of financial stabilization in transition economies .
This Small Grant for Exploratory Research ( SGER ) generates data from national surveys conducted in Bulgaria , a transition country in South East Europe , which implemented a currency board in1997 to combat years of high inflation .
The surveys are large in scope and include questions on expected devaluation , expected inflation , attitudes toward the monetary regime , beliefs about the operation of the currency board , and preferences over alternative monetary regimes .
Combined with a rich set of demographic characteristics , the data are used to study the evolution of credibility over time , the various influences on agents ' beliefs and expectations , the process of learning about the regime , and the political outcomes of stabilization for the population at large and for different social groups defined on the basis of age , political affiliation , gender , income , education , and employment status .
Four surveys have already been completed in the first four years of the currency board .
This SGER would make it possible to build on that work by conducting one more survey and by continuing the analysis of the economic effects of credibility .
With an application for additional financing at that point , the final objective is to generate a data series that span the lifetime of the currency board from its inception to Bulgaria 's entry into the European Monetary Union .
Survey data are needed because transition economies do not have financial markets , which are developed enough to provide a menu of interest rate and other financial data required for such research .
In addition , the surveys make it possible to examine not only macro level but also deeper disaggregated social dynamics and effects , which are difficult to observe otherwise .
Financial stabilization is studied in a broad political economy and institution-building framework , which is appropriate in the context of a nation in transition .
So far , the surveys have revealed a number of unique insights .
The analysis informs three important policy issues .
First , the project helps understand the process of monetary institution building in transition economies .
Second , it informs the choice of monetary regimes in countries , which are in membership negotiations with the European Union .
Third , it generates predictions important for countries , which consider implementing a currency board .
In addition to its research and policy relevance , the project also contributes to education and training through the activities of the Principal Investigator ( PI ) and the Andrew Young School of Policy Studies ( AYSPS ) at Georgia State University .
The AYSPS conducts training programs for government officials and collaborates on curriculum development with university faculty from several developing countries .
The project generates useful knowledge for these activities .
The PI advises several graduate students who work on development issues similar to those studied in the project .
Finally , the project enhances knowledge about Bulgaria , a country that has not received much research attention despite its interesting transition dynamics its important geographic position on the Balkans .
Lay summaryThis project will examine the evolution of resistance to pathogens in the context of sexual selection and reproductive behavior .
Using crickets as model organisms , the research has two components .
First , the effect on immunity of a unique component of courtship , tibial spur feeding , will be examined in the ground cricket Allonemobius socius .
The female feeds from a wound she makes on a spur on the male 's tibia during mating , allowing her access to the male 's circulatory system and potentially compromising his immune response .
How has sexual selection via this nuptial gift influenced male and female ability to resist disease ?
A series of experiments on virgin and mated males and females will examine the effect of tibial feeding on encapsulation ability and resistance to pathogens .
Second , a comparative study will investigate sex differences in immune response across several ground cricket species that differ in life history .
Do seasonal species , in which females must sequester resources for reproduction over a restricted period , show a different pattern of sex bias in immunity than species in which investment is spread out over a longer period ?
Although male vertebrates have generally weaker immune responses than females , such a difference has rarely been explored in invertebrates , despite the advantages of performing experimental and field manipulations in these animals .
Furthermore , little research has examined the relationship between reproductive behavior and disease resistance .
With support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities ( CRIF ) Program , the Department of Chemistry at Bowling Green State University will acquire a Matrix-assisted Laser Desorption Ionization - Time of Flight ( MALDI-TOF ) Mass Spectrometer .
This instrument will be used in a wide variety of research projects , including a ) investigations on novel metal-organic chromophores and materials ; b ) studies of de novo designed proteins for use in electron transfer and DNA damage ; c ) studies of supramolecular materials as anion sensors ; and d ) investigations on self-assembled RNA motifs .
Matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization ( MALDI ) time-of-flight ( TOF ) mass spectrometry is the technique of choice for obtaining accurate molecular weights on molecules up to and over 300,000 daltons , with extremely high sensitivity .
Use of a MALDI-TOF mass spectrometer has therefore become a standard technique in studies involving biomolecules .
At Bowling Green , this instrument will therefore also be used in the undergraduate Biochemistry laboratory for protein analysis .
With support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation ( CRIF ) Program , the Department of Chemistry at Syracuse University will acquire a powder X-ray diffractometer .
This equipment will enhance research in a number of areas such as the structure and dynamics of molecules and the chemistry of materials , including species as diverse as metal oxides , metal borides , metal chalcogenides , cluster-based nanostructures and extended metal-organic pi-systems .
Other projects which will benefit include the characterization of solid state products of hydrothermal reactions , the characterization of thin film samples , and the identification of the products from the removal of solvent and interstitial or interlamellar components from layered and open framework materials .
Specifically , researchers will use the instrument to carry out bulk analyses of samples , identify temperature-dependent phase changes , identify the degree of crystallinity in polymers , and explore the preffered orientation of such materials.The X-ray diffractometer allows accurate and precise measurements of the full three dimensional structure of a molecule , including bond distances and angles , and it provides accurate information about the spatial arrangement of the molecule relative to the neighboring molecules .
These studies will have an impact in a number of areas , especially materials chemistry .
The instrument will also be used for formal instruction in the Chemistry and Earth Sciences Departments at Syracuse University .
The Building Engineering Team Skills Program proposes to determine industry best practices by culling practitioners ' experience and expertise and then adapting thosepractices to build engineering team skills as part of the University educationalexperience.There is a great need for research to determine what capabilities , characteristicsand dispositions of engineers working on teams are most valued by industry .
Similarly , there is a great need to understand what practices best serve to create and nurture whichteam skills.Best practices will be determined through multiple research methodologies targetingmultiple respondent sources and utilizing a phased approach .
Completion of each phasewill provide results specifically designed to inform the next research phase .
There willbe three phases consisting of Manager Interviews , Manager Survey , and EngineerSurvey.After the research phases determining skill value and the best practices for creating thoseskills have been completed , then course curricula , materials and exercises will be planned.Activities will first occur at California State University Hayward , then at University of California , Berkeley , two institutions rich in the diversity of their underrepresented student populations .
0234215DobrosavljevicThis award supports theoretical and computational research and education on the metal-insulator transition .
Several different , but equally important , physical process all play a role ; these include the physics of Anderson localization , the effects of strong correlations , and processes associated with glassy freezing of electrons .
Energy scales associated with each of these processes are all comparable , so a successful theory must include them all on the same footing .
All three basic physical processes associated with the metal-insulator transition can be consistently incorporated within extended dynamical mean-field theory ( DMFT ) approaches .
They are all treated on the same , non-perturbative level allowing a realistic description of many materials .
The PI aims to apply extended DMFT methods to several specific systems in an effort to explain phenomena that were beyond the reach of theoretical approaches in the past .
Specific topics to be addressed include ( 1 ) Disorder , magnetic field , and doping dependence of the critical behavior in doped semiconductors ; ( 2 ) Localization effects on magnetic ordering in diluted magnetic semiconductors ; ( 3 ) The two-dimensional metal-insulator transition viewed as a transition to a Mott-Anderson glass ; ( 4 ) Non-equilibrium glassy dynamics of electron transport close to metal-insulator transitions ; ( 5 ) Low temperature spin-glass behavior in electronic Griffiths phases of disordered heavy fermion compounds .
In each of these projects , DMFT methods used will be technically tractable and will address the main physical questions .
This award supports the integration of research at the forefront of condensed matter science and education at all academic levels K-12 , undergraduate , and graduate .
This will be accomplished through participation in various activities , including Outreach programs - The PI will contribute to enhancing scientific and technological understanding by communicating the importance of his research to the general public through various outreach activities , including lecturing at elementary schools , judging at annual regional Science Fairs , and participating in the FSU Physics Department Open House ( PDOP ) and the NHMFL Annual Open House activities .
Research Experiences for Undergraduates ( REU ) program - The PI will participate in the REU Site at the NHMFL and plans to provide an opportunity for at least one intern every year to spend two summer months working on one of his research projects .
FSU graduate students will be trained - The PI will supervise the research of several physics graduate students in physics .
% % % This award supports theoretical and computational research and education on the transition between metallic and insulating states observed in two-dimensional systems , dilute magnetic semiconductors , and some heavy fermion materials .
This problem is theoretically challenging in part because it involves different and possibly competing physical processes .
The PI will apply and advance a promising avenue of inquiry based on the dynamical mean field theory and its extensions .
This award also supports the PI 's involvement in a range of education related activities including outreach , undergraduate involvement in the PI 's research , and the training of the next generation of condensed matter theorists .
*** The goal of the research is to further the development and analysis of a simple prokaryotic system which models the complex process of homologous recombination in eukaryotes .
The investigators have replaced the normal recombination system of the bacterium Escherichia coli with the Red recombination system of bacteriophage lambda .
This switch to the Red system makes the bacterium far more prone to carry out recombination events involving linear double-stranded DNA molecules in the size range of single genes .
The recombining DNA will be delivered into the Red-expressing bacteria by infection with a modified version of bacteriophage lambda .
This bacteriophage injects its chromosome , which is cut in two places by a restriction endonuclease present in the bacterium , releasing a linear double stranded DNA molecule containing the antibiotic resistance gene cat , flanked by sequences identical to parts of the lacZ gene in the bacterial chromosome .
Recombination between the linear DNA and the circular bacterial chromosome produces a strain in which lacZ is replaced by cat .
Unlike the starting strain , these recombinants are both antibiotic-resistant and unable to utilize the sugar lactose ; they are readily selected and enumerated .
Experiments are proposed to explore the involvement of various recombination-promoting genes in Red-mediated gene replacement .
The bacterial genes recF , recO , recR , recA , and recQ , and the lambda genes orf and rap will be studied in particular .
In a second set of experiments , the dependence of the recombination event upon structural features of the linear recombining DNA species will be examined .
Questions to be addressed include whether the system responds more efficiently to some sequences than to others , and whether various artificial DNAs bearing indigestible phosphorothioate linkages are active in Red-mediated recombination .
The research places dependability analysis in a formal , software engineering process .
This process is integrated with the analysis phase , when analysts and domain experts are interacting toformalize models of the artifact , environment and requirements of the system .
The research focuses on building accurate , useful , robust models of the environment .
The general approach is to look to existing modeling methodologies that center on exploring the environment .
Those that show promise , e.g. , the strand space methodology used in security models , will be retooled and integrated into the HDCP/MDS testbed.The research also focuses on the environmental assumptions that are made during modeling as a basis for dependability of the deployed system .
The research explores the link between assumptions made at analysis time , i.e. , the assumptions made about the environment for the system to function correctly , and the actual environment behavior seen at run time ( or testing/simulation time ) .The evaluation of the research will be conducted on a series of projects taken from the HDCP/MDS testbed .
Each project will be selected to highlight a separate modeling issue of the environment .
DMS-0234048PI Dibyen MajumdarCo-PI 's Kathryn Chaloner , Angela DeanConference on New Directions in Experimental Design ( DAE 2003 , Chicago ) May 15-17 , 2003AbstractThe advancement of statistical theory and methodology over the past years has resulted in the development of sophisticated methods capable of analyzing complex experiments .
This has given rise to a demand for efficient designs for these experiments .
Development of these designs will require new approaches and new techniques .
At the same time , a new generation of enthusiastic and talented researchers in design of experiments will be needed in the years to come to carry out original theoretical and applied research in the emerging areas .
The junior researchers of today need to be nurtured and encouraged to assume this role .
In order to address these needs it is intended to bring together senior and junior researchers and practicing statisticians from universities and the industry for a three-day conference in Chicago .
The emphasis will be on design of experiments for biomedical and pharmaceutical studies .
In particular , there will be featured sessions on Designs for HIV Studies ; Bayesian Methods for Designing Clinical Trials ; Chemical Compound Selection from Huge Databases ; Crossover Designs ; Designs for Random Effects , Variance Components and Hierarchical Models .
The conference will also give prominence to recent innovations in the more traditional areas of experimental design that , besides solving existing problems , enrich the researcher 's toolkit.The principal objectives of the conference are threefold ( i ) to focus on future new directions of research on design of experiments in the biomedical and pharmaceutical sciences ; ( ii ) to support , encourage and provide stimulus to junior researchers , that is , recent Ph.D. 's and current Ph.D. students , who are working on , or have a strong interest in , design of experiments ; ( iii ) to create an atmosphere for the exchange of ideas and information , between statisticians and researchers in universities and the pharmaceutical industry .
It is estimated that at least half of the participants will be junior researchers , who will be encouraged to give talks and present posters .
Other participants will include leading authorities from universities and the pharmaceutical industry .
Junior researchers will be provided the opportunity to be matched with a senior mentor .
Ample opportunities will be provided for formal and informal discussions .
This project will complete construction of a high-quality digital bathymetry database for the Southern Ocean component of the Global Ocean Ecosystem Dynamics GLOBEC ) program .
Existing along-track and swath bathymetry data collected in Marguerite Bay and in the West Antarctic Peninsula shelf study , have been assembled and merged with new SeaBeam and along-track data collected during cruises of the research vessels R/V Palmer and R/V Gould in 2001 and 2002 .
New bathymetry data has also been obtained from other US , British , and Russian sources to extend the program database .
Once the final R/V Palmer and R/V Gould cruises are completed and other data added , the program database will be closed , edited , documented and made publicly available for use by international GLOBEC investigators and by the broader geophysics community .
These results will be developed in conjunction with , and will become part of a planned circum-antarctic high resolution bathymetry database .
WGBH is conducting preliminary work on an untested and novel idea for a new multimedia project , EGames .
The target audience for the project is children ages 9-12 .
The project envisions a 13-part television series which combines the appeal of a game show with the drama of real-world challenges to engender enthusiasm and promote understanding of engineering in kids nationwide .
The television programs will be complemented with materials and training for engineers to mount EGames events in public venues and run workshops in schools , afterschool programs and libraries , and an extensive companion website.During the research phase , WGBH will convene a Content Advisory Board which would include professional engineers , curriculum developers , classroom teachers , professors of engineering and informal educators , and a Funding Advisory Board .
They will also write the series curriculum , design the game , develop outreach , Web , and evaluation plans , and develop and test a sample engineering challenge with a group of contestants to work out logistic and production questions .
This will inform the next stage of project development .
0234292DornThis research plans to explore a highly innovative technique for preparing endohedral metallofullerenes .
Empty cage fullerenes , such as C60 and C70 , and endohedral metallofullerenes are most commonly prepared in a Kratschmer-Huffman electric-arc generator by high temperature vaporization ( 3000-5000 K ) of graphite rods packed with metals and/or metal oxides .
The typical endohedral metallofullerenes , such as Ax @ C2y ( x= 1-3 , y=30-50 ) have been reported with encapsulated metal and non-metal atoms , but are typically formed in low yields ( < 0.5 % ) with multiple isomers of low symmetry .
The PI 's research group has recently reported the first class of stable endohedral metallofullerenes , A3-xBxN @ C2y ( x=0-3 , A , B=metal , y=34 , 39 , 40 ) , e.g. , Sc3N @ C80 , formed by a trimetallic nitride template ( TNT ) process in significantly improved yields .
For example , the archetypal Sc3N @ C80 is stable in air to temperatures of 600-650 K or in nanotube peapods in vacuo to temperatures in excess of 1300 K. The discovery of a more rational synthesis for the preparation of the trimetallic nitride template ( TNT ) endohedral metallofullerenes at lower temperatures would open new vistas for these unique materials in a wide range of electronic , optoelectronic , magnetic , catalytic , nanomechanical , and medical applications.The high stability of the TNT endohedral metallofullerenes suggests new avenues toward a more rational synthesis of these unique materials .
The recent success in preparing C60 by pyrolysis of precursor hydrocarbons at lower temperatures is an example of this strategy .
This success , coupled with the declining cost of empty-cage C60 , suggests the possibility of using this prominent fullerene , C60 as a precursor for endohedral metallofullerenes .
Preliminary chromatographic retention time and mass spectrometry data clearly identify the TNT endohedral metallofullerene Sc3N @ C80 as a major product of this new lower temperature synthesis .
Several other empty-cages are also produced C70 and C84 as well as several new endohedral metallofullerenes .
These results are extraordinary , although much fundamental research is critically needed to exploit the potential for preparing these TNT endohedral metallofullerenes in large-scale quantities .
The specific aims of this study are to optimize operating parameters of the quartz tube batch reactor for high yield , lower temperature production of TNT endohedral metallofullerenes such as Sc3N @ C80 ; isolate and characterize new endohedral metallofullerenes ; elucidate the mechanism ( s ) and key intermediates involved in this lower temperature reaction utilizing isotopic tracers ( 15 N and 13 C ) ; and construct a continuous reactor for enhanced production of the TNT endohedral metallofullerenes .
Proposed here is a study featuring models for the interaction of surface and internal oceanic waves with sediment-laden bottom topography .
The project includes derivation and mathematical analysis of models , development of algorithms for the approximation of solutions , implementation of the algorithms as computer codes , comparisons of the output of numerical simulations with field data , the use of the models for prediction and their development as a tool for effective coastal engineering .
The basic issue under consideration is challenging in that it involves the temporal evolution of two free surfaces whose dynamics are connected in a complex and nonlinear way .
The wave motion involves the deformation of the water 's surface , or in the case of internal waves , the pycnoclines .
Even over a fixed bottom , these issues are difficult in their exact formulation , and consequently model equations are typically used .
In the present conception , the bottom is not fixed , and this added complexity is what makes the issues proposed here for study scientifically very interesting .
In view are three-dimensional models that are initiated by incoming wave fields from deep water .
These models will allow for long-shore variation and take account of reflection .
It is planned to develop such models and to test them extensively against both laboratory experiments and field observation .
Comparisons are in view at several sites around the world , including the Field Research Facility of the US Army Corps of Engineers at Duck , NC , a site of the Polish Academy of Sciences on the Baltic Sea , the North Coast of the Magdelan Islands in the Gulf of St. Lawrence , the Gold Coast of Australia , the Island of Djerba off the Tunisian coast and two regions in Morocco ( Alger in the Gibraltar Strait and Agadir on the Atlantic coast ) .
The motivation for carrying out the study outlined above is several-fold .
First is the pure science of the subject .
The project involves interesting and substantial issues from hydrodynamics , partial differential equations , and sediment transport theory .
Secondly , it is an ideal venue in which to acquaint students with interdisciplinary research .
There is a strong practical reason for this study as well .
The erosion and retreat of coastlines is a worldwide phenomenon .
Global warming will increase the activity of storms , raise the sea level , and further degrade the present , sometimes catastrophic state of many beaches .
Fragile Arctic coasts , beaches on the Great lakes and on many coastal regions already display the unmistakable signs of deterioration caused by these global changes and aggravated by social developmental pressure .
Severe erosion is likely to spread to many coastal areas within half a century and thus increase the demand for effective prevention methods .
The present project aims at deepening our understanding of fundamental wave-bottom interaction processes , especially as regards sediment dispersal .
Going beyond the science , the project also grapples with the intelligent use of this kind of knowledge in designing coastal protection strategies .
With experience already in hand , it is clear that there are a variety of protection options and that it is not always smart to simply build some permanent , often-ugly structure .
So-called 'soft ' protection methods are a useful addition to the reperatoire of the coastal engineer .
These are much less expensive when they can be made to work .
The assessment of the practicality of a protection plan , be it 'hard ' or 'soft ' relies upon the kind of knowledge investigated under the auspices of this project .
Ecological mechanisms that lead to speciation ( the evolutionary splitting of one species into multiple new species ) are central to general theory synthesizing ecology and macroevolution .
Although competition for resources has long been viewed as the major mechanism by which natural selection would lead to divergence of organism traits , there are few conclusive examples of competition promoting speciation .
The proposed research will provide a rare and strong test of the ecological speciation hypothesis in a system of co-occurring spadefoot toad species.Specifically , it will test whether competition among larvae of the spadefoot toads , Spea bombifrons and S. multiplicata , is leading to ecological speciation .
This research will evaluate the general hypothesis that populations of S. multiplicata that do and do not occur with S. bombifrons are becoming reproductively isolated from one another because of contrasting competitive pressures faced by their larvae .
The goals will be to test the following three predictions ( 1 ) hybrids from crosses between populations should be less fit than offspring from matings within populations because of selection against hybrids ; ( 2 ) traits under divergent selection between environments should influence mate choice and thereby form the basis of reproductive isolation ; and ( 3 ) divergence in these traits should evolve in parallel in different populations that experience similar selective pressures .
This project will form a decisive test of ecological speciation and will enhance our understanding of how competition promotes adaptive radiation .
This study will , therefore , help explain the origins of diversity , which is one of the most challenging issues confronting biologists .
Gravity waves with periods ranging from minutes to hours are believed to affect the atmospheric circulation , temperature , and mixing processes at levels extending from the troposphere through the mesosphere and above .
However , they are too small to be resolved in general circulation models ( GCMs ) and must be treated via parameterization .
That is , their effects must be described approximately for inclusion in large-scale models .
This research program aims to quantify the properties of gravity waves and determine their sources , their geographic and seasonal variations , and their effects on the atmosphere .
Emphasis is on the waves generated by hurricanes and other convective storm systems .
The goal is to improve the ways of parameterizing their effects in GCMs .
The approach focuses on analysis of aircraft and balloon observations from previous field experiments to derive information on the momentum flux and the temperature perturbations associated with gravity waves , which information is then employed for developing parameterizations .
Collaboration on including the parameterizations in GCMs is planned with researchers at the NOAA Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory and other organizations .
These studies will provide a means of both studying the global-scale effects of gravity waves and refining the parameterizations .
The goal of the work is to improve large-scale atmospheric simulations by approximating more accurately the effects of the waves .
The National Science Foundation ( NSF ) Microbial Observatory ( MO ) and Life in Extreme Environments ( LExEn ) programs have provided critical opportunities for research into the diversity and activity of microorganisms .
Together , these programs sponsor diverse research efforts on microbial communities from a wide variety of natural environments , ranging from the extreme and/or unusual ( e.g. , hydrothermal vents and hypersaline lakes ) to the typical and/or ubiquitous ( e.g. , ocean waters and agricultural soils ) .
The investigators funded through the MO and LExEn programs have pushed the frontier of microbial diversity and microbial biogeochemistry research , discovering novel microbial lineages , describing the complexity of natural microbial communities , and linking microbial taxa to critical ecosystem functions .
A workshop , including principal investigators of MO and LExEn projects , other outstanding scientists in the field , and Postdoctoral students is proposed as a mechanism to enhance future research in environmental biology and microbial life .
The purpose of the workshop is two-fold 1 ) to provide a platform for principal investigators , post-doctoral associates , and graduate students to share ideas and techniques among projects , facilitating communication of technical advancements and fostering collaborative/interdisciplinary activities ; and 2 ) to discuss the future of microbial life research programs sponsored by the National Science Foundation , including identification of funding gaps and analysis of new research frontiers .
The workshop will provide an important opportunity for student and postdoctoral training .
At least 22 postdoctoral associates and graduate students will take part in the meeting as representatives of MO or LExEn projects .
An additional 24 postdoctoral associates currently funded through the NSF Microbial Biology postdoctoral program , including underrepresented minorities in science , have been invited to attend .
The Principal Investigator will use an existing three-dimensional , time-dependent quasi-compressible research cloud model to study the bulk microphysical structure of warm ? season deep convective storms for diverse geographical environments from tropical to mid ? latitude .
This project will investigate the effects of the geographical environment on the following volume-integrated properties relating to the storm-scale water cycle the total condensate mass , the production and depletion of the precipitation within this condensate pool , and especially the partitioning of the mass by hydrometeor types and of the microphysical transfer rates by the individual processes contributing to them .
A recently completed project by the Principal Investigator has laid a foundation for the work by simulating and analyzing thunderstorms in the semi-arid High Plains of North America and the humid subtropics .
The Principal Investigators will extend their approach to substantially more regions in recognition that ( a ) several contrasting North American thunderstorm climatologies have been documented for regions other than those two , ( b ) several other regions of the world from the Tropics through mid ? latitudes are subject to especially frequent or intense convective storms , and ( c ) in low latitudes , deep convection has repeatedly been observed to be systematically weaker at sea than over land , with significantly different microphysical makeup .
The researchers will investigate up to approximately ten locations , subject to availability of data suitably representative of pre-storm environmental conditions for the control experiments .
Thunderstorm environments under consideration include the summer monsoon of North America 's subtropical desert southwest , tropical and subtropical Asia and Western Europe .
Comparison of model results among the control experiments for different regions will emphasize the volume-integrated bulk microphysical properties noted above , and especially the time-averaged percentage breakdowns of their partitioning during the mature phase of a storm .
The research , if successful , will be significant to the advancement of knowledge in mesoscale atmospheric dynamics and will increase fundamental understanding of the nature of convective activity under various climatic regimes .
Data-intensive applications such as data mining demand significant compute and I/O resources .
With the ubiquity of World Wide Web and the advances in clustering technologies , it becomes a reachable goal to bring these data-intensive applications to a large number of users in real-time .
Online applications such as Internet services differ from their offline counterpart in the performance sensitivity to highly concurrent workload and the availability requirement .
It is challenging to achieve high performance , reliability , and efficient resource management for these applications under highly concurrent workload.This project addresses the system and programming-level issues in buildinghigh performance and reliable runtime support for highly concurrentnetwork services and online applications .
There are three main researchthrusts in this project .
First , cluster-based system architectures are studied with a focus on overall system scalability/availability as well as load balancing and data replication support .
Secondly , this project investigates programming and runtime support to simplify the development and deployment of online applications that involve concurrent and parallel data manipulation on clusters .
Thirdly , a cluster-based resource management framework will be developed with the combined goal of quality-of-service and overall resourceutilization efficiency .
Throughout this project , efforts will be made toexamine data-intensive applications and validate the effectiveness of theproposed work .
Additional issues will be investigated as more experienceare gained through system development and application evaluation.The developed software will be released in public for potential use of otherapplications.Since more and more data-intensive services are being madeavailable through intranets and the Internet , it is expected that thedeveloped results will have broad impacts .
Research described in this proposal will directly benefit instruction improvement for undergraduate and graduate education at PIs ' institutions and enhance students ' experience in cluster-basedcomputing .
This interdisciplinary study , combining organic isotope geochemistry and freshwater ecosystem science , seeks to determine the importance and role of Aged Terrestrial Organic C ( ATOC , which is naturally depleted in 14C ) after it is exported from landscapes to large rivers .
The investigators will to determine what happens to old terrestrial organic matter once it enters a river .
The Hudson River is the focus of this study because prior work has shown terrestrial organic matter of considerable age ( 1000 to 5000 years old ) dominates C inputs to this river .
Observations , experiments and modeling will be used to determine ( 1 ) the variability in ATOC delivery to large rivers across seasons and among tributaries , ( 2 ) decomposition rates of ATOC within rivers , ( 3 ) controls on the balance between ATOC decomposition and export , and ( 4 ) the importance of ATOC in fueling riverine metabolism , relative to younger terrestrial inputs and to primary production within rivers themselves .
Graduate and undergraduate students working on this project will receive multi-disciplinary training that will strengthen research and education linkages among three collaborating institutions .
The investigators will continue to develop interactions with Hudson River outreach organizations ( Clearwater , Scenic Hudson ) to communicate project results to the general public .
The idea that a modern river is influenced by organic matter produced in forests centuries ago is a captivating framework with which to educate the public about the C cycle in general and rivers in particular , and the inextricable link between continents and the ocean .
PROPOSAL NO 0234102PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR Volker BrendelINSTITUTION NAME Iowa State UniversityTITLE A NIH-NSF BBSI Summer Institute in Bioformatics and Computional - Iowa State UniversityAbstract A NIH-NSF BBSI Summer Institute in Bioinformatics and Computational Biology ( SIBCB ) is planned at Iowa State University ( ISU ) .
The faculty are 10 principal scientists with diverse areas of expertise , from computer science , mathematics , statistics , genomics , informatics , biophysics and structural biology .
Summaries of recent accomplishments in genomics , methods in bioinformatics and computational biology , and applications to genetics and molecular biology will be presented in a two week intensive instructional course , including programming instruction and computer laboratory sessions .
The participants will be 15 students supported by this grant and an additional group of 11 students from industrial laboratories plus two high school teachers , who will broaden the experience for the core students and provide additional funds to enhance the course .
Following the course , the 15 NIH-NSF supported students will select among research projects and spend eight weeks developing their own research projects ; thus the SIBCB will last 10 weeks .
These projects will span the range from sequence analysis to comparative genomics to protein homology modeling to simulations of organism growth .
An organized job fair will include presentations by the faculty .
Immediately before embarking on their research projects , the students will receive an introduction to Bioethics .
The research period will present the students with tools to comprehendand begin significant research projects with a broad , integrated approach to complex biology .
The mammalian lat gene encodes an adaptor protein ( LAT ) that is expressed in only a limited number of cell types , including T cells , mast cells , natural killer cells , and platelets .
Tyrosine phosphorylation of the LAT protein following receptor engagement results in its interaction with a variety of downstream signaling molecules , an event essential for proper cellular function .
In addition to its cell-type restricted expression pattern , the level of lat mRNA is altered during the process by which T cells are activated to elicit an immune response .
Interestingly , it appears that certain signal transduction pathways in T cells stimulate lat gene expression whereas others have an inhibitory effect .
The objective of this research is to initiate a comprehensive study into the various molecular processes responsible for differential expression of the lat gene .
This objective will be accomplished by the following means ( 1 ) identification of the DNA elements comprising the proximal lat promoter ; ( 2 ) characterization of the proteins that interact with these defined DNA elements and a determination of their functional relevance in controlling lat gene expression ; ( 3 ) investigation into the role of the proximal lat promoter in the genes ' cell-type specific expression and its differential expression during T cell activation ; and ( 4 ) examination of the contribution of RNA stability and the role of distal control regions to the regulation of lat gene expression .
Studies of the regulation of the lat gene will not only provide important information concerning the molecular mechanisms controlling its expression but in addition will contribute to the establishment of general principles of gene regulation which will be applicable to other genes in a variety of living organisms .
This research will be conducted as a collaboration between the principal investigator and undergraduate students at Agnes Scott College , a four-year liberal arts institution for women .
This proposal was received in response to the announcement NSF 01-157.They have organized a Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team ( NIRT ) motivated by the hypothesis that understanding of the roles that concentration gradients of signal molecules play in cell dynamics , neuronal axon growth in particular , with unprecedented spatial resolution andchemical control is very important .
The team consists of four PIs from Chemistry , Neuroscience , and Mechanical Engineering , with expertise in surface functionalization and biomolecule immobilization , neuronal axon growth mechanisms , and nano-delivery and characterization tools for biomolecules .
The combination of expertise and synergy from this collaboration will allow them to develop methodology for the generation of chemical and biochemical gradients that possess the following attributes ( a ) the gradients are supported on a solid surface for precise control and quantification ; ( b ) the gradients possess cellular ( ~um ) and sub-cellular ( ~102 nm ) spatial resolution ; ( c ) arbitrary or designer gradient profiles , including digital ( discrete ) or analog ( continuous ) gradients , are possible ; ( d ) the method are not molecule-specific and the gradients may include multiple components .
The proposed method will be based on a precision nano-delivery tool , an electrospray system capable of 10-18 liter volume resolution , to deliver chemical or biological samples onto a functionalized solid surface .
A designer gradient will be generated by a programmed voltagepulse-train in combination with programmed movement of the sample .
Monolayer assemblies onthe solid surface will be designed to confine the nano-droplet for high resolution , to immobilizesignal molecules in the nano-droplet , and to provide chemical or biological compatibility for celladhesion and growth .
They plan to use neurons as a model biological system to explore the roles of gradients of extrinsic molecules in guiding neuronal axon growth.The proposed research will provide an excellent opportunity for participating students to work atone of the forefronts of nanoscience/technology , i.e. , molecular nano-biology and nanobiotechnology .
In addition to graduate training , the PIs plan to develop and co-teach a freshman seminar course annually on , Nanobiology science and engineering of neuron growth , to stimulate undergraduates ' interest and participation .
It is anticipated that their proposed activities will contribute to the preparation of future innovators and leaders in nanoscience in neurobiology and its practical application .
With this award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities ( CRIF ) Program , the Department of Chemistry at the University of Washington will upgrade their NMR facilities .
This equipment will enable researchers to carry out research on a ) the determination of protein structure and dynamics ; b ) alkane functionalization with transition metal complexes ; c ) synthesis and reactivity of transition metal hydrides ; d ) metal mediated oxidation chemistry ; e ) rapid local angular motions and slow conformational changes in DNA ; and f ) RNA recognition by proteins and drugs .
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance ( NMR ) spectroscopy is the most powerful tool available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules .
It is used to identify unknown substances , to characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules , and to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution .
Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research .
The results from these NMR studies will have an impact in fundamental synthetic organic chemistry and biochemistry .
This award will support a Field Workshop to measure and sample volatile emissions from volcanic centers in the Nicaragua and Costa Rica segments of the Central American Volcanic Arc .
This workshop is the 8 th Field Workshop organized by the IAVCEI Commission on the Chemistry of Volcanic Gases ( CCVG ) and will take place in March 2003 .
The overall theme of the workshop is sampling of volcanic volatile emissions using direct sampling methods and newly developed land-based and space-based remote sensing techniques .
Organizers and attendents will compare techniques and identify methods to improve current measurement strategies .
The focus of this workshop is Poas volcano in Costa Rica , and Masaya , Momotombo and Cerro Negro volcanoes in Nicaragua .
Because subduction zone parameters show significant changes between Costa Rica and Nicaragua ( amount of sediment contributing to arc magmas , slab angle ) comparison of the volatile emissions from these volcanic centers is expected to be interesting .
By involving a large number of specialists we hope to most accurately resolve variations in volatile compositions and fluxes between the different volcanoes and eliminate problems related to sampling and measuring techniques .
0234751FlemingIn eukaryotic cells , cytoplasmic and nuclear compartments are separated by the nuclear envelope .
This double membrane structure contains numerous nuclear pores that regulate the flow of molecular information into and out of the nucleus .
Proper functioning of this transport process is essential for normal cellular metabolic regulation as well as the transmission of developmental signals from the extracellular and cytoplasmic compartments to the nucleus so that gene transcription can be regulated and modified during cellular differentiation processes.Many specific transporter molecules have been identified in this process .
In particular , Dr. Fleming will focus on the importin a ( imp a ) genes act as adapter proteins for cargo molecules containing classical nuclear localization signals .
The imp a gene family contains three distinct members ( clades ) imp a1 , a2 and a3 .
Metazoan animals generally have representatives of each of the three clades .
The evolutionary conservation of all three clades from Drosophila through human suggests that each clade is constrained in its ability to diverge from or converge on the others , suggesting that each clade has evolved specialized functions .
He has chosen to examine the imp a gene family in Drosophila since there are only single genes representing each of the clades , thus allowing us to assess any specific functions of individual clade members.The merit of these studies resides in the definitive demonstration of unique roles for specific imp a genes in nuclear transport and perhaps roles for these genes in other cellular processes .
The elucidation of these functions is critical for the understanding of cellular signaling and homeostasis .
It is expected that these roles will be conserved in other metazoan animals having representative members of the different imp a clades .
His studies will reveal evolutionary conservation of specific functions by comparisons with other species .
Additionally , the experimentation within this proposal will provide undergraduate students with direct exposure to current biological methodologies while demonstrating the extent to which conclusions can be drawn from available data .
This exposure will allow students to design additional experiments based on their findings and explore the true nature of scientific thought and experimentation .
It is further anticipated that students will experience the opportunity to present their findings at local and national meetings and also in publications to experience the totality of the scientific community and the interactions fostered by it .
ABSTRACT CTS-9817048 Santore , Maria/Lehigh U .
This program targets the generation of rules for the custom design of polymeric additives that will bring several industrial sectors closer to environmental compatibility coatings formulation ( replacement of organic formulations with aqueous ones ) , waste water treatment ( flocculants effective for aggressively aerated low solids sludges ) , paper making ( increased white water recycle and lower waste stream volume ) , aqueous lubrication , and oil recovery ( biodegradable additives compatible with sandstone formations ) .
In these instances environmental compatibilization depends on a fundamental understanding of the transient dynamic aspects of polymer adsorption and colloidal phenomena .
In particular , the program targets the questions of how specific polymer chemistry and architecture determine ( 1 ) adsorption rates and ( 2 ) interfacial relaxations .
The program then addresses ( 3 ) how adsorbed layers in different stages of relaxation mediate colloidal interactions and cause stabilization or flocculation .
The outcome from this program , in addition to design rules that allow one to tailor molecules that are dynamically responsive to the timescales of particular processes , includes information about transient colloidal potentials that will facilitate process-specific flocculation and stabilization models .
The core scientific program at Lehigh is supplemented with liaison projects involving 4 companies , coop programs , and 5th year masters programs , for the most effective technology transfer to bring the fundamentals to the specific industrial situations .
An experimental program employing model narrow molecular standard water soluble polymers ( polyethylene oxide and pullulan - based ) and substrates of controlled chemistry ( through the deposition of self assembled monolayers ) will allow systematic variations in the relevant chemical and architectural parameters in studies of adsorption , interfacial relaxation , and the evolution interfacial colloidal for ces .
Use of these model systems is critical to the development of theory for dynamic behavior .
The issues of adsorption , relaxation , and colloidal forces will be probed through a unique combination of techniques .
Polymer adsorption and relaxation kinetics will be measured with a synergistic combination of total internal reflectance fluorescence ( TIRF ) and near-Brewster reflectivity , developed in the PI 's lab under prior NSF support .
Together the two methods measure the evolving surface mass , the evolving layer thickness and density , and the kinetic behavior of fluorescently-tagged interfacial populations .
Interfacial relaxations will be further probed through self exchange studies using TIRF .
These studies will establish the evolutionary timescales of the layers and provide some idea of which layer features evolve .
Models developed under a Research Initiation Award will be modified to give quantitative explanation of the observed dynamics .
The next phase of work relates this evolving layer structure to colloidal behavior .
Dynamic measurements of colloidal forces will be measured using 'MASIF , similar to the surface forces apparatus , but designed for dynamic data acquisition .
Finally impinging jet colloidal deposition studies will be employed to measure how interfacial relaxations and pairwise colloidal force measurements translate to flocculation or stabilization in situations of strong shear and hydrodynamic collision forces .
The sticking ability , as a function of the transient interfacial state and hydrodynamic conditions can be used in existing flocculation models to make them more process-specific for wastewater , paper , coatings , and oil recovery applications .
This project develops time-domain solvers for wave propagation problemsin two and three dimensions , with fundamentally improved properties , namely , significantly reduced sampling requirements and , at the sametime , significantly higher accuracy .
Such solvers would allow modelingof linear and , eventually , nonlinear wave propagation in domains thatare thousands of characteristic wavelengths in size , with interfaces andvariable coefficients .
This approach would also provide improved basesfor solving nonlinear advection-diffusion problems .
The solvers arebuilt upon two new techniques , namely , optimal quadratures to representbandlimited functions , and a numerical generalization of separation ofvariables to accelerate applying higher-dimensional operators .
Eachtechnique contains the potential to significantly advance computationalscience across a wide range of applications .
Together they provide anew paradigm that efficiently organizes the information contained inoperators governing physical phenomena .
This project develops thesetechniques further , and develops multiresolution representations foroperators and functions , based on the optimal quadratures.Any computational modeling of natural phenomena requires discretizationof the underlying mathematical equations .
This project addressesquestions of optimality and efficiency of such discretizations , and oforganization of information for two important modeling areas , wavepropagation and geophysical fluid dynamics .
This research aims togenerate a much wider use of efficient techniques for representinginformation in scientific modeling , and to increase the speed andaccuracy of simulations by up to two orders of magnitude , withforeseeable benefits to such areas as seismology , remote sensing , acoustics , optics , geophysical fluid dynamics , and quantum chemistry .
Itwould reduce the computational cost of obtaining high accuracy , which isnecessary to describe phenomena that are highly sensitive to changes inphysical parameters , and that often cause technological bottlenecks.This Collaborative Research is led by the Department of AppliedMathematics at the University of Colorado at Boulder , and includes theDepartment of Meteorology at the University of Maryland at CollegePark .
It will fund one research associate , two visiting scientists fromUMD and Ohio University , and one graduate student in a diverse researchgroup that includes a research associate , two postdoctoral researchers , a graduate student , and four undergraduate students .
The explosive demand for communication services , fueled by therapid growth in the areas of mobile communications and theInternet , has generated and will continue to generate immenseresearch efforts in the area of wideband wired/wirelesscommunications .
To accommodate the demanding future applications , systems must be designed to perform joint equalization , detection , decoding and estimation of the unknown and possibly time varyingchannel parameters , while maintaining reasonable complexity ( andlow cost ) .
Motivated by these requirements , and using an OFDMindoor wireless system as a design example , two main directionsare investigated in this project.In the first direction , receiver algorithms are designed foriterative , joint equalization , detection and decoding , thataddress the critical issues mentioned above .
The investigationstarts by identifying a powerful model that encompasses all thesalient features of the OFDM transmission system .
Data detectionin OFDM is then stated as a problem of two-dimensional ( 2D ) datadetection in the presence of localized , 2D intersymbolinterference , non-linear distortion , and unknown and time varyingparameters .
We then identify fast , joint data detection andchannel estimation schemes which are utilized as building blocksfor powerful adaptive iterative detection receivers .
Unlike theentire iterative receiver , these sub-blocks are optimal in aprecisely defined sense , and can be implemented withless-than-exponential complexity with respect to the data sequencelength.The second direction is the development of a unified framework forthe analysis of the transient and steady-state behavior ofadaptive iterative algorithms .
In the proposed study , the receiveris assumed to have no explicit knowledge about the channelparameters , other than their statistical description .
The minimumsignal-to-noise ratio required for convergence to error-freetransmission , and the optimal allocation of power in pilot andcoded symbols , are some of the issues that are investigated for awide variety of adaptive iterative receiver architectures.Regarding propagation modeling for the indoor environment , theapproach followed herein is a direct divergence from the classicalapproaches that include either measurements , or thewell-established ray-tracing techniques .
In particular , ultra-fastalgorithms for the numerical solution of the electromagneticproblem are developed .
These algorithms result in almost exactsolutions that can be evaluated with complexity comparable to theless accurate ray-tracing techniques .
Jones 0219543This exploratory syudy aims to assess the relevance of two perspectives policy dynamics and policy learning for understanding domestic policy changes for the Arctic .
Specifically , the political science team will assess whether the construction of a Canadian database capable of monitoring public change relevant to the Canadian North is feasible and whether a policy learning prspective can be applied to the study will consist of examination of the potential quantitative data sources for Arctic policy monitoring in Canada and some field travel to gain understanding of policy networks in the Canadian setting .
Continuing support via the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution will permit U.S. ocean scientists in the academic research community to participate in specific activities of the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea ( ICES ) and the Scientific Committee for Oceanic Research ( SCOR ) .
These activities are of particular interest to the ocean sciences community and the National Science Foundation .
ICES is an intergovernmental organization that coordinates data and information exchange regarding scientific research , management of fisheries , environmental monitoring , and oceanographic research matters that are of common interest to countries bordering the North Atlantic .
SCOR serves primarily as an organization to facilitate international collaboration of ocean research through the formation of working groups and publication of findings on various marine topics .
Under this award U.S. academic research scientists will participate in selected ICES and SCOR activities in 2002-2004 .
Image retrieval has been an active research area for many years , buttwo fundamental problems remain largely unsolved 1 ) How best tolearn users ' subjective query concepts , and 2 ) How to measure perceptualsimilarity with significant accuracy .
The first problem concerns thecompleteness of formulating a query concept , e.g. , how to formulate aquery such as `` animals , '' `` cathedrals , '' or `` aircraft .
'' The secondproblem concerns search accuracy , i.e. , given a learned query concept , how to find all images that match that concept.To tackle these two fundamental problems and to ensure that oursolutions are scalable , this project has four specific targets.First , we plan to develop novel active learning algorithms thatquickly learn users ' subjective query concepts ( thoughts and intents ) despite time and sample constraints .
Second , we will designsemi-automatic image annotation and annotation refinement methodsfor assigning semantic labels to images in order to support multimodalityquery-concept learning and information retrieval .
Third , we willdevise perceptual distance functions for improving accuracy of visualsearches .
For instance , once a query concept such as `` enemy vessels '' is learned , we want to find every matching object in the surveillancedatabase , not missing any .
Finally , we plan to conduct validationstudies } on developed learning algorithms , using experimental dataprovided by colleagues at various institutions ( including IBM researchcenters and Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco ) .
CMS-0219123PI Richard J. FinnoInstitution Northwestern UniversityTitle Collaborative A joint NU-UIUC Project for Development of New Integrated Tools for Predicting , Monitoring and Controlling Ground Movements due to ExcavationsAbstractThe increased urbanization , population density and traffic congestion in major urban centers in the US has lead to a greater demand for underground space .
Current homeland security concerns have prompted consideration of use of underground space for placement and protection of critical and sensitive infrastructure along urban corridors .
With new development , and increasingly more redevelopment within the urban areas , there is a clear need to efficiently and safely develop underground space .
A major concern when placing deep excavations in urban environments is the impact of construction-related ground movements on adjacent buildings and utilities .
The ground movements cause structures supported by the affected ground to deform and possibly sustain damage .
It is critically important to predict and control the magnitude and distribution of the ground movements that result from creating the underground space.This collaborative research project aims to develop new , integrated tools for predicting , monitoring , and controlling ground movements associated with excavations in urban areas .
The project is a joint venture between Northwestern University and the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign .
The project will explore and develop new technologies that offer substantial promise for greatly enhancing the construction control process and attendant mitigation of ground deformations including ( 1 ) field instrumentation and sensors with wireless communication capabilities , ( 2 ) data storage and display , including the display of construction progress and ground and building movements in a virtual reality environment , and , ( 3 ) intelligent , self-updating numerical models to simulate the excavation and support process and to compute anticipated ground and structure movements .
These new technologies and improvements will be field tested in real time during excavation projects .
The project has strong educational and industry outreach components in addition to its research components .
A group of contractors and engineering firms that have national practices will provide access to ongoing excavation projects and participate in the project advisory board .
Faculty and their students from primarily undergraduate institutions will participate in the project .
EIA-0219079Jouline , Igor BGeorgia Technology Research Corporation - GITITR Comparative Genomic Analysis of Signal Transduction in ProkaryotesWhole genome sequencing projects revolutionize our understanding of biology and open up new opportunities for fundamental research and its applications to medicine , agriculture and environment .
Accumulating genomic data generates the need for rapid biological interpretation of genome sequences and integration of this knowledge into databases of genomic information for immediate use by biomedical and environmental scientists .
Proteins comprising signal transduction networks control most vital functions in any given organism , beneficial or harmful .
However , current interpretation of genomic data for signal transduction proteins fails to provide sufficient information for understanding their biological role .
The goal of this research project is to significantly improve prediction of biological functions for signal transduction proteins and to unravel potentially novel signal transduction mechanisms and pathways in various beneficial and pathogenic microorganisms .
This will be achieved through a systematic computational approach , which integrates in-depth analysis of functional elements ( domains ) of individual proteins and evolutionary and genome context information .
The results obtained will be incorporated into primary databases and will allow automated detection of biologically important proteins .
The research proposed in this project will contribute to a better understanding of the organization and evolution of signal transduction systems ( fundamental aspect ) .
This , in turn , will assist experimental scientists in identification of targets for antimicrobial drug design in pathogens and in improving beneficial capabilities of microorganisms used for biofertilization and bioremediation purposes ( applied aspect ) .
This proposal concerns new improvements that have the potential to achieve significant speed-up for the fast multipole method ( FMM ) for use in solving the Helmholtz and other problems used to model phenomena encountered in electromagnetics , acoustics , biology etc .
Solving larger problems holds promise for better design on the one hand , and elucidation of new physics/biology on the other .
Discretizations of the partial differential equations arising from these equations yield large systems of equations for which both direct and iterative solution techniques are expensive.The introduction by Rokhlin & Greengard of the FMM generated tremendous interest in the scientific computing community , as it demonstrated a way to generate structure and achieve fast solution of equations without relying on the discretization .
Despite its promise , the algorithm has not achieved widespread implementation for many practically important problems that could use the promised speedups .
Some researchers have reported that the approximate integrals both make implementation difficult , and in practice they have been shown to introduce stability problems .
We have recently derived exact expressions for the translation and rotation of multipole solutions of the Helmholtz equation , which enable fast computation via simple recursions .
Further we have obtained very promising results on the properties of the translation operators that enable creation of very tight error bounds .
Our translations have the same asymptotic complexity as the standard integral expressions , but with much smaller coefficients .
We have also found that the translation operator can be decomposed into the product of sparse recurrence matrices and this can be the basis for a T ( p2 ) algorithm , which we propose to pursue .
Based on these expressions , we will develop software for solution of different problems using the FMM .
To be useful in pushing ahead the information technology revolution our software will be well documented and published in accessible peer reviewed forums .
Such availability will act to improve adoption by large numbers of practitioners .
The projects to be undertaken here have as their goal a substantial increase in the number of African American Ph.D.s in mathematics , statistics and other quantitatively based disciplines .
Objectives include-Identifying of students at participating HBCUs who have the potential to obtain an advanced degree in a mathematical science or a field employing mathematical skills and methods.-Providing mentoring , nurturing and research experiences for the students identified above throughout their undergraduate careers.-Building bridges between participating HBCUs and majority institutions to provide a seamless transition to graduate school.These projects will be carried out by the Alliance for the Production of African American Ph.D.s in the Mathematical Sciences , a consortium of departments of mathematics , statistics and testing and measurement at the three Iowa State Regents Universities and four Historically Black Colleges and Universities Alabama A & M University , Benedict College , Florida A & M University and Jackson State University .
The first project will involve the selection , mentoring and nurturing of eight undergraduate Alliance Scholars at each of the four participating HBCUs .
Each of these students will be provided with two mentors a mentor at the student 's home institution and an Iowa Regent mentor .
These mentors will work together with the student to develop an individualized course of study as well as a series of research projects .
Students will spend time at Iowa Regents Universities and will normally be offered admission and support at an appropriate Ph.D. program at one of these universities upon graduation.The second project will be an eight-week Alliance Summer Institute to be held each summer at either Iowa State University or the University of Iowa .
Among the objectives of this project are-Providing information about the variety of research areas and career paths available to students with quantitative abilities and training.-Providing a cultural and academic introduction to life and work at a large , majority university.-Providing opportunities for interactions between students and professors at minority serving institutions and their counterparts at majority universities.-Providing exposure to distinguished minority scholars and other longtime supporters of minority scholarship.-Providing opportunities to carry out research projects , both alone and in groups.Twenty-four students will be selected for the Summer Institute each summer .
They will be organized into research teams consisting of three students , one faculty member and one graduate student assistant .
Faculty will be drawn from a pool of Alliance faculty ; graduate student assistants will be selected , where possible , from among the twenty-seven underrepresented minority graduate students in the University of Iowa Department of Mathematics .
Preference will be given to eligible Alliance Scholars ; remaining positions will be filled by undergraduate students who will most benefit from the sort of experience provided here .
Further information may be obtained by calling Phil Kutzko at 319-335-0758 or sending him email at pkutzko @ blue.weeg.uiowa.edu .
EIA-0219310Peter McCartneyArizona State UniversityTitle Networking Urban Ecological Models Through Distributed Services Urbanization is a central force in altering core ecological processes such as biogeochemical cycling , decreased biodivesity and changing land use and land cover .
Understanding and managing these processes is crucial to sustaining natural resources and maintaining quality of life .
The goal for this project is to develop and deploy a distributed information infrastructure so that diverse members of the urban ecological research community in central Arizona can benefit from integrated ecological models and data .
Government agencies involved will include the Maricopa Association of Governments and the Arizona Dept .
of Water Resources .
This collaborative research project aims at advancing informationtechnologies related to the preservation , retrieval , and disseminationof digital imagery for Asian art and cultural heritages .
Researchersin the US , China , and South Korea will collectively investigate anddevelop technologies for acquiring , browsing , managing , and searchinglarge collections of high quality art images .
This project willcontribute to the fundamental knowledge and technologies required tocreate and maintain information systems that can operate in multiplelanguages , formats , media , and social and organizational contexts.The US research team will focus on ( 1 ) multimodal media management , ( 2 ) distributed data mining , and ( 3 ) image storage and display .
The teamwill develop theoretical foundations to associate linguistic termswith image features .
The testbed databases of art images for thisresearch project consist of high quality scans , with metadatainformation and detailed keyword information , as well as comprehensivetextual descriptions .
The research work will show that ( 1 ) modernmachine learning and statistical data mining tools are capable oflearning from non-structured or semi-structured input data such ashuman annotations , ( 2 ) statistical image modeling techniques can beused in automatic linguistic indexing and concept dictionary building. -- -- -- Abstract0219870PI Morris ChangIowa StateThe thesis of this project is very simple the performance of garbage collection is critical to the successful deployment of distributed Java embedded systems .
Applications for such systems have different operating requirements than applications written for desktop or server environments .
They include frequent software update , low power consumption , low resource availability , distributed computing capability , and real-time operating constraints .
Therefore , garbage collectors for such devices must be designed to support those requirements .
Garbage Collection ( GC ) , or automatic dynamic memory management , is one of the many attractive features available in Java .
It allows programmer to be more productive and software to be more robust .
On the other hand , it is also notorious for being intrusive and consuming large amount of power due to frequent memory accesses .
As a result , the garbage collection can severely degrade the performance and affect the viability of Java embedded devices .
Fourier analysis appears in many of the celebrated cornerstones oftheoretical computer science .
It plays essential roles in expandergraph construction and derandomization , complexity lower bounds , probabilistically checkable proof systems , quantum computing , lowerbounds for distributed computation , and traditional applications tocomputer algebra .
The majority of these applications involve thefamiliar framework of commutative Fourier analysis .
The proposedproject brings together a multidisciplinary research team to apply thebeautiful tools of non-Abelian ( that is , noncommutative ) Fourieranalysis to investigate open questions in two areas where non-Abeliangroups have recently become very important lower bounds for parallelcomputation and quantum algorithms .
The program also further developsefficient algorithms for the discrete Fourier transform over finitenon-Abelian groups.This project focuses on developing tools for separating the complexityclasses ACC^0 and NC^1 , in order to demonstrate that there are natural ( polynomial-time computable ) problems which simply can not beparallelized in the sense of ACC^0 .
The project applies a new familyof tools for separating such circuit classes , using non-AbelianFourier analysis to bound their computational power .
These tools applyalso to the problem of solving equations over finite groups , and thedevelopment of new probabilistically checkable proof systems based onnon-Abelian groups .
In addition , the project applies non-AbelianFourier analysis to develop improved lower bounds on the standardQuantum Fourier Transform approach to Graph Isomorphism and studyquantum Monte Carlo algorithms .
Finally , the project focuses onadaptations of Bratelli diagrams and quivers to develop classical andquantum algorithms for the non-Abelian Fourier transform itself .
The large number and diversity of quality of service ( QoS ) measures present a significant challenge to the design and operation of multimedia wireless communications systems .
Each information source ( data , audio , video ) has its own metrics of signal quality and the network has an aggregate measure of capacity for each source ( for example , Erlangs of telephone traffic and data throughput ) .
In addition to signal quality and network capacity , the battery life of a portable terminal has a major effect on the value of mobile information services to consumers .
Existing knowledge of quality optimization is generally confined to studies of individual sources .
In the 1990s , a significant body of knowledge was created on radio resource management for cellular telephone communications .
More recently , the research community has turned its attention to wireless data and video .
Each study focuses on one or two quality measures for one type of information for example , power and distortion for video ; power and throughput for data .
This project takes a more comprehensive view by considering the collection of QoS measures to be a point in a multidimensional space .
Given a system design and a set of operating conditions , the achievable points constitute a feasibility volume , with optimum points on the surface .
Within this formulation , we study simultaneous transmission of data and video by analyzing projections of the volume onto various combinations of QoS dimensions including video distortion ; data throughput for each source ; data utility for each source ; total power dissipation ( signal processing power and transmission power ) in a terminal ; number of simultaneous video transmissions at a base station ; aggregate base station throughput ; aggregate base station utility.The emphasis is on power efficient communications and the results provide guidance on joint adaptation of the following properties of terminals that transmit signals to the same base station transmission power and rate in data terminals and transmission power , compression , and channel coding in video terminals .
The growing popularity of mobile devices with wireless capabilitiesimposes new and fundamental challenges in extending the capabilitiesof wired Internet applications to the wireless domain .
This project willinvestigate proxy-based techniques for enabling the next generation ofmobile multimedia and web applications .
The proposed research will focus onthree characteristics of mobile environments , namely client mobility , intermittent connectivity , and resource-poor nature of mobile devices .
Research issues that will be addressed in this project include ( i ) power-friendly streaming techniques and real-time handoffs formobile multimedia applications , and ( ii ) caching and dissemination oftime-varying and location-dependent data accessed by mobile webapplications .
The proposed techniques will be evaluated using aneclectic mix of simulation , analysis and prototype implementation .
Thesignificance of the proposed research arises from the widespread andgrowing use of mobile devices that provide ubiquitous , wireless accessto data on the Internet .
The likely impact of this research will beto advance the state of the art in proxy-based infrastructures fornext-generation mobile multimedia and web applications .
With National Science Foundation support , Dr. Joseph E. Grimes will conduct two years of linguistic research to extend the capabilities of comparative linguists by matching their expertise in making pattern recognition judgments with a computational tool that organizes all their data in response to those judgments .
This division of labor will allow linguists to stay on top of greater quantities of data from more speech varieties than has ever been possible , because it provides an information technology infrastructure for their discipline .
Though notable work in language comparison has been done by hand , it consumes years ; indeed , for much of the world there are more educated guesses about what the linguistic relationships might be than there is well-martialed evidence for those relationships .
This project 's linguist-machine partnership will empower investigators to do their analysis expeditiously ( including adding in data from languages that could become extinct in the next generation and be lost to science ) , to follow out competing hypotheses , to work collegially as easily as individually , and to offer precise documentation to others through public archives .
All these things have been difficult to do using traditional methods.To find out how human groups have diverged and migrated scholars must draw not only on written and oral history , but also on recoverable prehistory , which is accessible mostly through comparative linguistics , archeology , and genetics .
If linguists are enabled to fill the gaps in their data and to make more precise their reconstructions of what our ancestral languages must have been like , it will lead to better insight into the processes by which all languages ( including English ) change over time , and to better understanding of connections between ancestral languages and ancient culture patterns .
Seeing language history in this way also adds the time dimension to our understanding of humanity 's capacity for language , and helps us to value language diversity rather than deplore it .
Solid research in this area , which the proposed tool will promote , can also help traditional societies to become aware of a deeper heritage than what their oral history alone gives them .
On a more immediate scale , it can identify areas where educational materials and literature developed in one of a closely related group of languages that share a common culture can be easily morphed into preliminary drafts of those materials for other languages in the same group .
With National Science foundation support , Mr. Gregory Indrisano and a team of Chinese and American archaeologists will conduct an intensive archaeological surface survey of Liangcheng County , Inner Mongolian Autonomous Region ( IMAR ) , People 's Republic of China .
This project , which will record the size and location of archaeological sites in a 200 square kilometer survey region , will bring together archaeologists from the Institute of Archaeology IMAR , Jilin University and the University of Pittsburgh .
The survey region is located 100 km east of the Yellow River and 300 km south of the great steppe regions of Asia , in an area marginal for both agriculture and herding .
The environmental attributes of this area make Liangcheng County an ideal geographic location to study the development of subsistence strategies that combine agriculture and animal husbandry .
Liangcheng 's position , 400 km north of the dynastic capitals at present day Xi'an and just south of the earliest of the Great Walls of China , makes this region appropriate for the study of the development of relations between the core of ancient China and its periphery .
The Liangcheng County archaeological survey will include the lowland alluvial plains appropriate for farming , highland mountain plateaus used for herding and the intervening zones that allow access to both resource zones .
Interviews with local herders and farmers , as well as analysis of satellite imagery will add to these preliminary subjective impressions of land use and allow the accurate delineation of this region 's ecological zones .
The information from the archaeological survey and the modern ecological map will facilitate the construction of a geographic database ( GIS ) to reconstruct how prehistoric peoples made use of their landscapes in response to local and regional level political processes , allowing a better understanding of the development of agro-pastoral adaptations on the periphery of China as well as a better understanding of how such subsistence adaptations develop world wide .
In addition , data collected by other studies of the paleo environment of the region will be analyzed to better understand how ancient environmental fluctuations affected subsistence strategies in this region .
Mr. Indrisano and his collaborators will concentrate on three main questions 1 .
How did the known developments from the center of China affect the development of political and subsistence systems in this peripheral region ?
2 .
Did indigenous political development have a different effect on subsistence strategies ?
3 .
How do ancient environmental fluctuations affect the local subsistence systems of this region ?
This research is important for several reasons .
It will continue the fruitful cooperation between Chinese and American archaeologists , in an area of the world that sees indigenous development of ancient empires .
Marginal environs , like those found in Liangcheng County , existed on the borders of many of the world great ancient empires , but the subsistence strategies and political development of these peoples have rarely been a foci of anthropology ; this project will provide a data set which will allow a better understanding of subsistence strategies and political development in north China but will also facilitate the comparison of these processes with other marginal regions around the world .
Proposal Number CTS-0219271Principal Investigator Gupta , Ram BInstitution Auburn UniversityTitle Supercritical fluid based polymer nanoparticles for biomedical applicationsABSTRACTThe PI has enhanced the supercritical antisolvent ( SAS ) process for micron sized particle formation by including an ultrasonic transducer in the precipitation vessel to interact with the solvent jet creating mush smaller particles in the sub-micron range .
The technique is innovative and further knowledge of the fundamental mechanism of operation would provide the information to optimize the method .
Since the Galveston hurricane of 1900 , improved systems for detection , warning , and evacuation have decreased the loss of life from natural hazards in the United States .
Population growth in hazard prone areas is likely to reverse this trend unless prompt and effective measures are taken .
Hazard-resistant land use and building construction practices could help to contain loss of life despite population growth , but there are economic and political barriers to implementing them .
Improvements in the ability to evacuate threatened populations will thus be needed.This research project addresses this need by developing an Evacuation Management Decision Support System ( EMDSS ) to assist public officials in monitoring a hazard 's onset and determining when and where to initiate evacuations .
A large data base on warning/preparation times , compliance/spontaneous evacuation rates , evacuation route utilization , and evacuation costs for both risk area residents and transients ( especially business and tourist travelers ) , and economic impacts to business due to evacuations will be constructed using multiple surveys .
Data on warning and preparation times , compliance and spontaneous evacuation rates , and evacuation route utilization are sparse ; data on evacuation costs ( as opposed to losses from disaster impact ) are lacking in the literature .
This database will feed the EMDSS to provide public officials support in facing hazards , such as hurricanes and help them balance the threat to public safety against evacuation costs under time constraints and uncertainty .
Valuable disciplinary goals will be reached through the collection and analysis of data that advance theoretical disaster research .
In addition , the project will perform a major interdisciplinary function by integrating social psychological theories with those from transportation planning to develop an improved evacuation time estimation model , and with theories from household and business economics to develop an evacuation cost model .
These perspectives will be integrated with concepts from decision analysis and decision support systems to produce the EMDSS .
Broader social utility will result through significant advances in technology to support evacuation decisions .
This work will add value to and leverage the hazard vulnerability analysis and evacuation planning work performed by the Hazard Reduction & Recovery Center for the Texas Governor 's Division of Emergency Management ( DEM ) for over twenty years .
This close relationship with an operational agency is unique among university-based hazard/disaster research centers .
The relationship between HRRC and DEM provides an unparalleled opportunity for user input into software design and accelerated technology transfer to state and local emergency managers .
The research will be coordinated with personnel from the Taiwanese National Science and Technology Program for Hazard Mitigation ( NAPHM ) , who are interested in collaborating in the extending the EMDSS to evacuations from landslides and inland flooding .
The Hazard Reduction & Recovery Center has a Memorandum of Agreement with NAPHM that has promoted cooperative exchanges between the two centers.Finally , graduate students will benefit by their involvement in survey development , data collection , and EMDSS development and evaluation .
A broader group of graduate students will benefit from inclusion of this material in the investigators ' environmental hazard management courses ( especially the one on disaster response planning ) and in a future edition of the textbook , Behavioral Foundations of Community Emergency Planning .
The project will employ members of under-represented groups , especially women and students from developing countries Kannan RamchandranU of Cal BerkeleyThis proposal addresses some important components in the theoretical and algorithmic signal processing machinery needed to make low-power , ubiquitous sensor networks a reality .
The physical and hardware attributes as well as the computing and communication capabilities of these low-power , low-cost sensors , particularly those based on high-density MEMS devices , have the potential to revolutionize next-generation information technology .
Indeed , next-generation MEMs sensors are expected to be very cheap and very small ( of the order of one millimeter cube ) with a communication range of several hundred meters and a bandwidth of tens to hundreds of kilobits per second .
The challenge is to build a pervasive , reliable , mas-sively distributed , dynamically self-conguring dense sensor network system out of these low-cost , ubiquitous devices .
While the hardware and computational infrastructure are following Moore 's law , the system-level expertise in terms of both theoretical and algorithmic knowledge-base needed to fully harness the potential of this infrastructure is sadly lagging behind .
The challenges presented by these networks are far beyond existing theories and algorithms , and in many cases require a fundamental paradigm shift from centralized to distributed architectures .
This proposal is accordingly motivated at developing some important components of the signal processing and communication system machinery needed to make this dream a reality .
PIs S. N. Batalama and D. A. PadosPROJECT ABSTRACTThe effectiveness of a receiver designed for a rapidly changing multiple access communications environment depends on the following design attributes ( i ) low computational complexity , ( ii ) multiple-access-interference resistance , and ( iii ) system adaptivity with superior performance under limited ( short ) data support .
Adaptive short-data-record designs appear as the natural next step for a matured discipline that has extensively addressed the first two , ( i ) and ( ii ) , design objectives in ideal setups ( perfectly known or asymptotically estimated statistical properties ) .
System adaptivity based on short data records is necessary for the development of practical adaptive receivers that exhibit superior signal-to-interference-plus-noise ratio ( SINR ) or bit-error-rate ( BER ) performance when they operate in rapidly changing communications environments that limit substantially the input data support that is available for adaptation and redesign.A novel line of research is identified and pursued in this project that lies in a multidisciplinary intersection of Estimation Theory , Communications Theory , and Mean-Square optimum linear filtering .
Consider an arbitrary input signal vector space and a given information bearing signal vector to be recovered in the presence of multiuser or other forms of heavy interference .
A key for the successful solution to the problem of adaptive receiver design under short data records is to employ receiver estimators with varying bias/variance characteristics and to control effectively these characteristics in a data-centric manner .
In this project , the investigators develop a short-data-record adaptive filtering framework that involves ( i ) the tools for the generationof a sequence of filter estimators with varying bias/variance tradeoff , as well as ( ii ) the tools for selecting the most appropriate estimator in the sequence for a given input datarecord .
The Auxiliary-Vector ( AV ) filtering means developed by the investigators during the past few years as a state-of-the-art practical engineering solution to the problem of short-data-record adaptive filtering is used as a benchmark case-study .
The theoretical and practical implications of such a research framework are far reaching .
Biased estimators and algorithms thatoffer full control over the bias/variance balance are rarely reported in the literature , if any in a communications applicable context .
While the target applications of this work are all criticalcommunications problems , the pertinent theoretical developments may touch many aspects of multidisciplinary engineering that are hampered by the `` curse of dimensionality '' and could benefit from adaptive filtering and/or adaptive system optimization through limited input data .
AbstractThe September 11 , 2001 attacks on the World Trade Center were an attack on corporate America .
Of the almost 3,000 persons killed , most were employees of private corporations and most of the direct economic losses were sustained by the private sector .
Corporate America is in the midst of a strategic change as the issues of crisis preparedness , physical sand information security and continuity of operations have become central and immediate in the days and months following the terrorist attacks .
Private sector businesses have come to realize that their very survival may depend on their preparedness to mitigate the consequences of and respond to extreme events .
The lack of a firm conceptual and experiential basis for business crisis management decision-making and planning raises the potential for relatively unproductive and wasteful decisions and resource allocations.The objective of this project is to conduct the necessary research to better understand the impacts of extreme events and to communicate the results in a manner that contributes to the ability of businesses to prepare for and recover from extreme events .
The following research based products are proposed to meet this objective1 .
A methodology for quantifying the organizational and economic impacts of extreme events on businesses.2 .
A framework for evaluating corporate preparedness for these extreme events.3 .
A definition of the common body of knowledge for executive level crisis managers.The proposed research is unique in its focus on individual businesses and the consequences resulting form terrorist acts .
Previous research efforts have addressed larger levels of aggregation such as impacts on regional economies resulting from natural hazard events and have typically address the impacts of individual disasters .
The methodology for quantifying organizational and economic impacts will utilize the limited empirical results obtained in prior studies .
The complex inter-organizational coordination among private sector businesses and between businesses and the government and non-government organization resulting from the September 11th attacks will be investigated and incorporated into the research products .
The evolution of these relationships that include a level of uniqueness for terrorists attacks will be valuable to business crisis managers as they prepare for potential future extreme events.The research team comprised of faculty and students from The George Washington University and the University of Pittsburgh has the experience and credibility to complete the research and report its result with the proposed two year research schedule and proposed budget .
This experience and credibility will enable the research team to know where to go for the required data and information and will provide the initial personal contacts necessary for access .
The research will build on the results of a prior NSF supported evaluation of the inter-organizational response to the September 11 attacks and a current Sloan Foundation grant that is developing the requirements for the response to a mass casualty event in a metropolitan area .
Software systems have become increasingly complex , and are expected toprovide service over wide operating ranges .
To meet service goals , software developers provide many tuning parameters that must beset carefully for the system to provide acceptable performance andfunctionality .
Tuning these parameters adequately often requires extensivetrial-and-error experimentation by system administrators .
As workloads andoperating conditions continually change , the parameters must be endlesslyre-tuned to provide good performance.This research project will apply feedback control to automate thisparameter tuning loop in two example systems .
The first , a wide-areareplicated file system , provides variable consistency and performancethrough optimistic concurrency control .
Feedback will be used to schedulereplica reconciliation and data migration to provide acceptableperformance and consistency to end users .
The second system , a databaseengine , offers a large variety of tuning parameters to be considered.Feedback control will be used to enable database administrators to managethe growing complexity of their server systems .
From these two examples and other work , a framework for feedback control ofdynamic computing systems will begin to emerge .
This framework will enablefuture computing systems to offer reliable and robust operation andpredictable performance , without costly maintenance and continual manualtuning .
Game consoles , with price points below $ 300 , performance rivaling or exceeding that of PCs , and graphics capabilities recently found only on high-end visualization supercomputers , are the vanguard of yet another computing generation .
computing on toys .
Moreover , market forces and fierce vendor competition ( e.g. , among Microsoft , Nintendo , and Sony ) continue to fuel technical innovation and performance improvements on these game platforms , creating research and development incentives and deployment opportunities in new domains .
This proposal outlines a research plan to assess the utility and performance of game systems for both scientific computing and high-resolution visualization .
This assessment of game systems will be based on development of a suite of adaptive performance analysis tools that support both offline and online performance optimization and their application to a suite of scientific and visualization codes .
This effort leverages proposed Red Hat and NCSA software enhancements to PlayStation2 Linux software .
In addition we currently are negotiating with Sony to acquire and deploy a large PlayStation2 cluster at NCSA for experimental assessment and scientific visualization .
Our computing on toys software research plan focuses on three areas ( a ) offline , multilevel performance instrumentation of applications and system software , ( b ) online , adaptive selection of multi-version code execution , and ( c ) experimental assessment using large-scale scientific applications and visualization software .
New hardware performance measurements , instrumented scientific and graphics libraries , and performance derivatives , all integrated with our SvPablo performance analysis infrastructure , will provide the requisite data to move iterative performance tuning from an ad hoc style to one based on intelligent feedback and suggestions .
The offline version of this SvPablo extension will accept performance metrics from hardware , software , and library instrumentation and generates suggestions for tuning locations and options using a fuzzy logic rule base that embodies performance tuning suggestions for the Sony PlayStation2 .
This project will build information retrieval interfaces for the rapidlyexpanding but virtually unstudied domain of biodiversity databases .
Anunderstanding of the nature and magnitude of biological diversity is fundamental to most pressing environmental and conservation debates .
Biodiversity databases contain organism-related information such as distribution , taxonomy , natural history , and conservation data .
This project will combine information visualization techniques and rapid feedback dynamic query interfaces coupled with an aggressive approach of working with representative users at all levels , from design through evaluation .
It will also utilize zoomable interfaces to allow users to navigate multiple hierarchies , in order to visually accommodate highly interconnected data .
The goals of the project are * To develop a searching interface for biodiversity databases targeting domain-novice adults .
* To build interfaces combining folk and scientific understanding .
* To evaluate the developed interfaces and compare them to existing interface models in the biodiversity domain .
This project examines the use of immersive virtual environment technology for eyewitness identification of criminal suspects .
This technology allows individuals to enter and move about three-dimensional digital worlds in real-time , observing and interacting with the environment and virtual others within it .
The rapid development of immersive virtual environment technology and increased sophistication in three-dimensional digital imaging of people promises a new age for determining accuracy of eyewitness identification of criminal suspects .
This is important societally as the general accuracy of eyewitness identification of criminal suspects using older technologies ( e.g. , police lineups , mug shots ) has been questioned in the research literature as well as in the judicial system .
The scientific goals of the project are threefold .
First , the investigators will determine the validity of using digital representations of humans within immersive virtual environments for person recognition .
Second , they will determine differences between traditional and immersive virtual police lineups in terms of eyewitness identification accuracy focusing on the increased contextual realism described above .
Finally , the investigators will use immersive virtual environment technology to develop quantitative indexes of fairness of such lineups based on the similarity of suspects to foils.Immersive virtual environment technology allows easier recreation of the same environmental conditions under which an eyewitness viewed criminal activity involving suspects .
Replicating such conditions is not easily accomplished using older technologies .
Hence , using immersive virtual environment technology , witnesses can be asked to identify suspects and foils at the same distance , viewing angle , lighting , weather ( e.g. , rain , fog ) as was the case during their observation of the criminal activity .
Furthermore , this technology makes it easier to match foils to suspects in terms of organismic variables ( e.g. , height , weight , hair style , coloring ) , clothing , and movements thereby eliminating potential sources of bias .
This technology also allows the quantitative assessment of how well suspects and foils are matched as opposed to pure subjective assessment using older technologies .
Bastain Braams of the Courant Institute at NYU and Joel Bowman of Emory University are supported by the Chemistry Division through the Information Technology Research program in a collaborative effort between theoretical chemistry and mathematics .
They will develop and apply dynamic , high-dimensional interpolation and approximation methods , combined with a sparse grid dimension reduction approach , to first-principles molecular dynamics calculations .
Applications guiding the project come from chemical kinetics and reaction dynamics , and especially combustion .
The methods and codes under development will have broad applicability in quantum chemistry and in high-dimensional function fitting and optimization.This project addresses a challenging and multi-faceted problem in scientifc computing , and combines research and research training in numerical analysis and computational chemistry .
The computer codes developed herein will be useful to other areas of computational science , and will be written and documented for wide dissemination .
New local-domain helioseismic observations reveal the presence of complex , large-scale , horizontal sub-solar-surface flows .
These remarkable weather-like flow patterns , now called Solar Subsurface Weather , are occurring within a zonal shear layer in which the rotational angular velocity increases rapidly with depth .
The flows possess intricate patterns that change from one day to the next , accompanied by steady large-scale handed zonal jets and meridional circulation cells .
Synoptic maps of this solar weather indicate that the Sun 's magnetic field modulates flow speeds and directions .
This effort will ( 1 ) develop an improved ring-diagram analysis technique that will be applied to the GONG+ data to provide continuous real-time coverage of solar weather , ( 2 ) use the synoptic solar weather maps to better characterize the magnetic modulation , ( 3 ) determine if the modulation can be used to predict and forecast magnetic eruptive activity in the solar atmosphere , and ( 4 ) evaluate angular momentum transport within the solar convection zone with the goal of understanding how the Sun maintains its observed differential rotation .
The aim is to provide a better mathematical framework andalternative design methodologies for coarse quantization of signals ina highly oversampled setting .
The central themes is sigma-deltaquantization in analog-to-digital conversion of audio signals and itscounterpart error-diffusion in digital halftoning of images .
In bothcases , a given target analog signal is represented by a judiciouslychosen one-bit ( or few-bit ) sequence which approximates the signal in asuitable low-pass subspace .
A wide range of different schemes exist forthis purpose , each corresponding to a different implementation andapproximation order .
As our primary mathematical objective , we expectto better understand the law of error decay of the existing schemes aswell as to improve on these by new designs .
On the algorithmic side , weaim to extend this analysis to settings with computational and otherimplementational constraints.The fact that digital signals and data sets can be processed , storedand retrieved with great precision and speed places high demands ofaccuracy on the conversion process from and to the analog world.However , the devices used in the translation process ( such as in thecase of analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog conversion circuits inaudio applications , and printers in image reproduction ) are ofnecessity analog devices , which have physical limitations that , atfirst sight , conflict with those accuracy demands .
To cope with thisproblem , engineers have empirically developed special signal processingtechniques leading to alternative signal and number representationsthat are quite different from standard decimal or binaryrepresentations .
Typical techniques take advantage of the highlyaccurate performance of the analog devices in sampling very densely intime or space to compensate for the lack of amplitude precision ofthose devices .
Interestingly , while these empirical schemes have provedefficient and have been used in consumer products for a long time , thecorresponding framework of signal processing has little mathematicalsupport .
We aim to study these schemes in more detail , with thegoals of improving the mathematical theory as well as proposingvariants that outperform those used presently , and to identify a widerrange of applications .
This project is at the interface between Information Technology and Nuclear Physics .
We will develop and apply a two-site data grid at Stony Brook and Brookhaven National Laboratory to analysis of heavy ion collisions in the PHENIX experiment at the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider .
Collisions at RHIC produce many thousands of particles , resulting in enormous volumes of data to analyze .
In order to study the rare process of gluon scattering at large angle , and how the nuclear medium affects this process , we must sift through hundreds of millions of these complex events .
We will use the software tools developed by the Globus collaboration to allow seamless data analysis across two computer facilities comprising many computers and terabytes of disk storage .
Jobs will be automatically directed to the facility where requested data are disk resident , and results returned to the user .
We will take advantage of many developments by others in information technology , but we bring to the table a unique mix of real data , eager users , and a cutting edge data grid application with a simple demonstration grid of two nearby sites with very similar hardware.Testing and optimizing this prototype grid under battle conditions will provide information applicable to development of large-scale global data grids for the future , as well as physics results from PHENIX .
This research will study the SPMP ( Selective Private Model-basedPrediction ) problem demonstrated with the following scenario A clientwith a private input wants to use a server 's private model to makepredictions ; however , neither side wants to disclose its private data toanybody .
More specifically , the research will study the problem forselected models including the Hidden Markov Model , the Neural NetworkModel , the Bayesian Network Model , and the Decision Trees Model .
The goalis to develop efficient and practical solutions that enable such type ofprivacy preserving prediction.The project will investigate two approaches commodity-server approach andmultiple-server approach .
The commodity-server approach uses thecommodities ( data ) from a third party to preserve the confidentiality ofthe private data .
The multiple-server approach uses duplicate servers sono single server can learn all information about the client 's data .
Basedon these two approaches , various data disguising techniques will also bestudied.Efficient solutions to the SPMP problems enable model owners to providenew forms of e-commerce services while protecting customers ' privateinformation .
Furthermore , the results , methodologies , and the buildingblocks gained from the proposed activity can provide invaluableunderstanding and insights into the Secure Multiparty Computation ( SMC ) research , and help to advance and expand the areas of SMC research. -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- - Advances in earth sciences have spurred a large growth in spatial-temporal databases with multidimensional attributes .
Unfortunately , theimprovement in data collection techniques has not been accompaniedwith the efficient methods that analyze large databases , which currentlylimits their use .
To address the need for facilitating large-scaleknowledge discovery at a wide range of spatial-temporal datasets theobjective of the proposed project is development of novel techniquesfor ( 1 ) task-specific data reduction in spatial-temporal databases ; and ( 2 ) efficient knowledge discovery on reduced spatial-temporal data.The first task builds on the observation that the amount of collected datais not necessarily correlated with specific knowledge discovery tasks , and that real-life datasets are often highly redundant .
The second taskaddresses a number of open questions for more efficient mining ofreduced spatial-temporal datasets including exploring trade-offsbetween model complexity and data reduction for efficient learning , exploiting residual correlations for prediction , and task-specificpartitioning of nonstationary spatial-temporal data .
The proposedtechniques will be evaluated on multi-source datasets with variouscomplexities .
This project will result in guidelines for effectivedissemination of spatial-temporal data sets to wider research audienceand algorithmic tools for more successful knowledge discovery from suchdata .
AbstractA jet engine failure at 30,000 feet or a power plant shutdown during peak operational hours can be costly from a human as well as financial standpoint .
Well-established procedures exist to monitor and diagnosis fairly severe problems with rotating machinery but little progress has been made in developing techniques to detect subtle changes in machine condition for both improved diagnostics , and to develop prognostic procedures for determining remaining service life .
The proposed project uses a novel application of Active Magnetic Bearings ( AMBs ) as actuators for applying a variety of known force inputs to a spinning rotor in order to monitor and evaluate response signals resulting from these inputs on-line .
The proposed procedure allows for multiple forms of force input signals to be applied to a rotating structure .
An important aspect of this approach is that the AMB ( s ) will be used in mid-shaft locations in conjunction with conventional support bearings .
In this manner , the diagnostic/prognostic procedures are developed here for use on any general rotating machine that can be designed or retrofitted with a single AMB actuator and still be supported in the original mechanical bearings .
The ability to examine a variety of known inputs and resulting outputs for condition monitoring in rotating machinery is unprecedented and the proposed technique has broad implications for improving operational safety and reducing maintenance costs in rotor-bearing systems in the aerospace , power generation , and petrochemical industries .
In addition , the very nature of the proposed procedure will ultimately facilitate machinery self-diagnostics and prognostics by allowing a method for self-testing .
This proposal requests support for a collaborative effort between investigators at MIT and Rice University to integrate access to the Grid computing model with the existing ROOT software framework , which is the de-facto standard in high energy and nuclear physics data analyses .
To deal with the large amounts of data to be collected by the high energy physics experiments at the Large Hadron Collider ( LHC ) at CERN , Switzerland , CMS and the other LHC collaborations are adopting the Grid paradigm that aims to provide consistent and efficient access to geographically distributed computing resources .
The goal of the project is to make Grid services available to ROOT users .
This will be based on the PROOF extension of ROOT and will be implemented in close collaboration with the ROOT authors at CERN .
Phase I will involve the initial design , development and prototyping cycle and a detailed benchmarking and evaluation period .
In phase II , production versions will be used on existing clusters for RHIC data and CMS simulation data .
We are in the midst of a new wireless revolution , brought on bythe adoption of wireless networks for consumer , military , scientific and other applications .
Wireless networks are acollection of terminals , or nodes , that are capable oftransmitting and receiving information to nearby nodes usingwireless access methods .
The harsh characteristics of the wireless channel provide thefundamental challenge for communication between wireless networknodes .
The key to reliable communication over wireless links is theexploitation of diversity , i.e. , observation of the sameinformation through different fading conditions .
While it ispossible to harness diversity by transmitting the same signal atdifferent times or frequencies , the implied redundancy is costlyfrom a bandwidth perspective .
It has been shown , however , thatintroducing additional antennas at the source and/ordestination enables diversity gain without compromise inbandwidth efficiency .
Wireless network nodes may or may not be equipped with multipleantennas .
How then , can they ensure reliable andefficient communication over the fading wireless channel ?
In this research , we investigatenovel strategies by which nodestransmit and receive cooperatively , allowingexploitation of spatial diversity gain that would otherwise beunavailable.The lack of structure in `` ad-hoc '' wireless networks isadvantageous from the viewpoint of flexibility , re-configurability , and low management cost .
The same lack ofstructure , however , makes the implementation of cooperativestrategies challenging .
It may be difficult , for example , to knowwhich of the helper nodes have correctly received the message .
Infact , it may be difficult to know which , if any , of the nodes canbe enlisted as helpers .
In this research , we solve these problemsthrough the combination of distributed cooperative codingstrategies , clever protocols , and sophisticated signalprocessing techniques .
The PIs are leveraging their respective expertise inspace-time coding and blind signal processing to devisepractical strategies for cooperative communication inwireless networks .
In addition , this research investigates thefundamental limits on the capacity of cooperative wirelessnetworks through a study of information-theoretic bounds .
Small-scale flow dynamics at low Reynolds numbers ( Re ) are important to phytoplankton cells in delivery of nutrients , sensory detection by and physical encounter with herbivores , accumulation of bacterial populations in the phycosphere or region immediately surrounding phytoplankton cells and coagulation of cells themselves as a mechanism terminating blooms .
In nature most phytoplankton experience unsteady flows , i.e. , velocities near the cells that vary with time due to the intermittency of turbulence and to discontinuous , spatially distributed pumping by herbivores .
This unsteadiness has not previously been taken into account in models or measurements with plankton .
Moreover , there have been decade- and century- long lags in moving relevant models of unsteady flow effects at low Re from applied mathematics and engineering to ecological applications .
Engineering models show unsteady effects due to the history of formation of spatially extensive flow perturbations or wakes should be important to unsteady motions of moderately small biota .
This project will address these affects .
Non-swimming phytoplankton , and in particular diatoms , will be used as the simplest case where important unsteady flow behaviors should arise .
This research activity will include a multi-level educational program , aimed at graduate research assistants , undergraduate research interns , undergraduate marine sciences majors and high-school teachers .
Low-Re behaviors afford unusual opportunities to experience how mathematics , physics and biology inseparably catalyze understanding of phenomena that run counter to intuition .
This activity will also include international collaborations with world experts on organism-flow interaction in Cambridge ( T.J. Pedley ) and Copenhagen ( T. Kiorboe & A.W .
Visser ) .
The overall goals of the activity are to accelerate the flow of understanding from modelers to measurers to users of the information and back again .
Educational materials that project U.S. national standards will be developed during intensive summer workshops with the high-school teachers and be made available on the web .
Unsteady flow effects on phytoplankton will be predicted with explicit models based on singularity solutions ( that involve the useful simplification that force is applied to the fluid at a small number of points ) and mathematical models that include both the near field at low Re and the far field over a range of Re , both representative of nature .
Singularity solutions allow explicit treatment of the role of complex cell shapes .
Scaled-up analog models will be placed in a large Couette vessel to better visualize behaviors for both the research and teaching efforts .
Natural-scale , but simplified , unsteady flows will be produced in smaller Couettes ( nested , counter-rotating cylinders with seawater in the gap between the two cylinders ) containing live phytoplankton and will be quantified by magnifying , particle-imaging velocimetry ( PIV ) .
Image analysis will be used to measure translation , rotation and flexural deformation of the phytoplankton .
These studies will test various hypotheses derived from the general thesis that cell shapes and mechanical properties interact with unsteady flows to produce potentially fitness-enhancing , relative motions of the cell or chain and its surrounding fluids .
A basic hypothesis is that unsteady fluid motion will interact with bending of cells to produce relative motion of fluid and phytoplankter .
A very exciting prospect is that periodic instabilities known to arise at low Re may allow flexible organisms to act as self-organizing engines - through elasticity to harness energy from decaying turbulence and thereby move relative to the fluid .
It is also expected that this study of passively bending structures in unsteady flows will help to understand the use of flexible appendages in swimming .
The work is likely to aid significantly in associating functions with the shapes and spines of microplankton that are used in the identification of fossil specimens .
By including relevant , unsteady fluid motions at low Re , the study will also provide firmer linkages between form and function in living plankton in the size range from 10 - 1000 mm that many large phytoplankton , invertebrate and fish larvae and other small zooplankton occupy .
With the rapid emergence of Internet-based techniques and theexplosive growth of pervasive computing , there will be an exponential increase of customers accessing information through battery powered mobile devices .
Data access techniques proposed for wired networks may not be feasible for mobile environments due to the limitations of bandwidth and power .
Therefore , it has become necessary to re-evaluate and possibly redesign data access strategies to efficiently utilize bandwidth and power considering the limitations of mobile environments .
In single-hop mobile environments , the research will address the issues associated with broadcasting and caching techniques , i.e. , the energy consumption issue , the query latency issue , the bandwidth utilization issue , and the scalability issue .
The research in multi-hop mobile environments concentrates on designing and evaluating cooperative caching techniques to reduce the bandwidth and power consumption , and to address scalability , cache consistency , and security issues .
A testbed will be used to evaluate the proposed data access mechanisms in an integrated manner and evaluate the effects of various techniques on the overall system performance .
The research results will have significant impacts on making pervasive computing more affordable to the increasing customer demands and more amenable to commercial , civilian , and military applications .
The summit crater of Mt .
Moulton , in West Antarctica , contains a 600-m thick horizontally-exposed section of ice with intercalated tephra layers from nearby Mt Berlin .
Argon-40/Argon-39 dating of the thick , near-source tephra indicates that the age of the horizontal ice section ranges between 15,000 and 492,000 years .
Thus , the Mt Moulton site offers an unparalleled repository of ancient West Antarctic snow and trapped air that can be used to investigate West Antarctic climate over much of the past 500,000 years .
The planar nature and consistent dips of the tephra layers suggests that , although the ice section has thinned , it is otherwise undeformed .
The Mt .
Moulton site was visited during the 1999/2000 field season , at which time a horizontal ice core representing approximately 400 meters of ice was collected , ranging in age from 15,000 to older than 480,000 years .
In addition to this horizontal core , samples of ice at a range of depths were collected in order to test the quality of the climate record in the ice .
Forty tephra layers intercalated in the ice were also collected in order to provide chronology for the ice section .
The results of this first effort are extremely encouraging .
Based on the d ? 18 O of ice , for example , there is clearly a useable record of past climate at Mt .
Moulton extending back beyond 140,000 years .
There is work to do , however , to realize the full potential of this horizontal ice core .
The elemental and isotopic composition of trapped gases suggest some contamination with modern air , for example .
As gas cross-dating of ice cores is the current standard by which climate records are intercompared , we need to understand why and how the gas record is compromised before adding Moulton to our arsenal of ice core paleoclimate records .
This award supports a collaborative effort between three institutions with following objectives 1 ) to evaluate more thoroughly the integrity of the climatic record through shallow drilling of the blue ice area , as well as the snow field upslope from the blue ice ; 2 ) to improve the radioisotopic dating of specific tephra layers ; 3 ) to obtain baseline information about modern snowfall deposition , mean annual temperature , and wind pumping around the summit of Mt .
Moulton ; and 4 ) to study how firn densification differs when surface accumulation changes from net accumulation to net ablation .
This Small Business Innovation Research ( SBIR ) Phase I project will develop a novel nanostructured polymer micelle system for targeted delivery of chemotherapeutic drugs .
A star structural polymer will be synthesized for use as the drug delivery vehicle .
The star polymer will form unimolecular micelles under aqueous conditions .
Hydrophobic drugs can be encapsulated in the unimolecular micelles and delivered to the cancer tissue via an active targeting process .
Functional groups at the micelles surface will act as targeting moieties and lead the drug carrier to the desired cancer cells .
The specific aims in the proposed program are to synthesize and characterize a candidate star polymer , and to conduct in vitro endothelial cell adhesive assay to determine the affinity of the star polymer to v3 and v5 integrins .
Commercially , with this proposed new drug delivery system , more selective delivery by active targeting is possible .
This will reduce the drug dose and undesirable side effects and make chemotherapy for cancer treatment more efficient .
New drug delivery systems have had an impact on nearly every branch of medicine .
Annual sales in the United States of advanced drug delivery systems exceed $ 10 billion alone and are rising rapidly .
Building on the existing framework at St. Louis Community College that supports recruitment and retention , we are developing an integrated program , Pathways to Success in STEM , to increase recruitment and retention of students seeking STEM degrees at the College .
Through piloting the program at the SLCC Florissant Valley and Meramec campuses , we are focusing our efforts on both increasing the number of students entering STEM programs as well as increasing the number of students completing STEM degrees.Our efforts are also expanded to recruit traditionally underrepresented students in STEM areas by reaching to school districts with 50 % or more minority student populations .
The project activities include ( 1 ) Windows to STEM Opportunities program -- designed to bring high school students and parents to the college campus to meet faculty and to be introduced to STEM laboratories and to career opportunities , ( 2 ) Gateway to Math and Science program-designed for under prepared students to gain skills and knowledge in math , reading , writing , and science needed to enter college-level STEM programs , ( 3 ) Advising/Career Counseling Workshops -- given to STEM faculty , support staff in academic advising , counseling , and the ACCESS office ( whose personnel work with students with disabilities ) , ( 4 ) Models of Success seminars -- developed to bring STEM professionals to the campus to meet with STEM students in small groups to share experiences in pursuing STEM education and careers , and ( 5 ) Expanded Articulation Agreement -- to ensure seamless transitions for students from their two-year STEM programs to four year institutions .
Our overarching goal is to develop an innovative , sustainable structure for on-going recruitment and retention efforts across all disciplines within the STEM division in the College .
This project is a multi-part planning and pilot testing effort design to increase enrollment in the ten science , technology , engineering , and mathematics ( STEM ) programs at the college .
Specifically the four pilot projects and two planning studies cooperatively attack the challenge of low enrollment and low degree production in STEM programs at SUNY Potsdam .
Through a variety of activities the project is developing planning strategies to address program promotion , recruitment , and retention .
The goal is to study how best to plan for and attract students into science courses and programs .
These plans and pilot studies involve exploring ways to help students to enter the program through bridge programs that support their learning , by encouraging experiential learning and undergraduate research , and by providing a bridge to post-graduate life .
The college is also studying the development of new interdisciplinary minor and major programs in Informatics .
The curriculum planning in Informatics models another way to introduce interdisciplinary science-based programs for students in the future .
The impact of the pilot projects is being disseminated through campus and regional newsletters , a website , and at the national level through annual meeting at the Association for Institutional Research Forum , National Education Association , and the Consortium for Computing in Small Colleges .
Ocean Studies Board Study on Cabled Observatories for Regional Oceanographic ResearchFor many years , Geoscientists have realized that Earth can not be studied adequately in a static manner by simply characterizing it over limited regions or for short periods ; instead , we must understand the myriad global processes that actively shape the Earth and ultimately impact society .
These processes occur over a vast range of temporal and spatial scales and exhibit considerable co-variation and dynamic linkages .
To characterize the temporal behavior of these dynamic systems , the establishment of long-term observational capabilities has been proposed .
The NSF proposed Ocean Observatories Initiative would provide new modes of access to the ocean in order to study these interconnected processes .
The system would consist of three elements 1 ) a regional-scale observatory consisting of interconnected sites on the seafloor that span several geological and oceanographic features and processes ; 2 ) several relocatable deep-sea observatories that are based around a system of buoys ; and 3 ) an expanded network of coastal observatories .
In 1999 , OCE funded a National Research Council study designed to examine the scientific merit of , technical requirements for , and overall feasibility of establishing a system of seafloor observatories .
The Committee on Seafloor Observatories was formed and the Symposium of Seafloor Observatories was held in January 2000 .
This symposium and study resulted in the publication of Illuminating the Hidden Planet The Future of Seafloor Observatory Science As a follow on to the previous study , this study will describe the scientific problems that could most effectively be addressed through a regional-scale cabled ocean observatory .
It will then discuss the strategies needed to design an observatory that can best carry out this science .
Strategies considered should include criteria for locating a cabled observatory , sensor requirements , data transfer rates , power needs , and other design considerations .
In arriving at its findings and recommendations , the study committee will consider recent reports that outline ocean science research priorities , existing cabled observatory strategies and implementation plans , and input from the ocean research community .
With the increased emphasis on the application of statistical techniques in hands on and practical settings , it is important for members of academic statistical community to develop working relationship with other academicians and members of the private and governmental sector to create active research consortiums .
This collaboration between North Carolina State University , Spelman College , and members of governmental agencies presents an innovative solution to addressing the needs of getting more practical applications of statistical techniques by statistics students while assisting in the management of huge and complicated data sets obtained by governmental agencies .
The collaboration stems from the Environmental Statistics Practicum developed and tested at North Carolina State University and the program adapts the current practices of this successful endeavor for use at Spelman College .
The development of protocols for training undergraduates in analyzing complicated data sets and analyzing environmental data to make better environmental policy decisions using modern statistical techniques lends itself to the intellectual merit of the proposed project .
In addition , the broader impacts are established through the retaining of undergraduate students in the graduate studies pipeline in order to pursue higher educational aspirations , adaptation and adoption of these programs in a historically black college for women , and developing student - industry interactions that lead to successful employment in STEM related careers .
High elevation plateaus are enigmatic features that form in contractional mountain belts.Regional crustal shortening and thickening cause significant amounts of surface uplift within plateaus .
However , other crustal and subcrustal lithospheric processes , such as lithospheric thinning , magmatic additions to the crust , tectonic underplating , or lower crustal flow may also play an important role in producing these broad , high elevation regions .
Understanding the mechanisms responsible for plateau uplift requires knowledge of the history of surface elevation .
Both the magnitude and time scale of surface uplift are controlled by the underlying mechanisms responsible for uplift .
The PI 's propose to study the uplift history of the Altiplano in Bolivia using oxygen isotope paleoaltimetry techniques in addition to testing a new cosmogenic isotope paleoaltimeter .
These paleoelevation data will help resolve current debates over the early versus recent uplift of the Altiplano .
In addition , these data will place constraints on the magnitudes and rates of uplift over time , enabling them to determine the importance of certain uplift mechanisms .
The Altiplano has an average elevation of 3700 m , second only to the Tibetan plateau in size and lateral extent .
This is an ideal setting in which to carry out a systematic study of long term surface uplift for the following reasons 1 ) A previous paleoelevation study , based on leaf physiognomy , provides a record by which to compare our paleoelevation data .
These data suggest that no more than half of the uplift of the Altiplano took by ~10 Ma ( Gregory-Wodzicki , 1998 ) and also provide paleotemperature estimates required for oxygen isotope paleoaltimetry .
2 ) Oxygen isotope paleoaltimetry can only be applied in regions that experience minimal evaporation ( humid environments ) , whereas cosmogenic isotope paleoaltimetry requires minimal erosion ( arid environment ) .
There is a large range of climatic variability within the Bolivian Altiplano , enabling us carry out oxygen isotope paleoaltimetry in the more humid northern Altiplano and cosmogenic isotope paleoaltimetry in the arid southern Altiplano .
3 ) There is a long-term history of sedimentation within the Altiplano , producing an extensive carbonate record from which oxygen isotope paleoelevation estimates can be obtained .
The ages of sedimentary rocks in the Corque basin , our target section , have been determined to be between ~14 Ma and ~5 Ma by 40 Ar/ 39 Ar dates of interbedded tuffs ( Marshall et al. , 1992 ) and magnetostratigraphy ( Roperch et al. , 1999 ) .
4 ) Data on the oxygen isotope composition of monthly and yearly rainfall has been collected providing an excellent d 18 O vs. altitude gradient ( Gonfiantini et al. , 2001 ) .
This gradient will be used to estimate the elevation of paleometeoric water from which carbonates were precipitated .
5 ) Widespread Miocene to recent volcanism within the Altiplano provides abundant datable paleosurfaces containing the mineralogies needed to apply cosmogenic isotope techniques to determining paleoelevation .
In the southern Bolivian Altiplano evidence suggests that these paleosurfaces have experienced very little erosion over the past 15 Ma ( Horton , 1998 ) .
The preliminary oxygen isotope data show a pronounced shift in oxygen isotopic ratios of about -7.5 between late Oligocene and late Miocene time , which suggests more than 3 km of surface uplift .
Initial measurements on apatite and sanidine indicate that both cosmogenic 3 He and 38 Ar are preserved in modern low latitude surfaces on the Altiplano .
This research is a collaborative effort between the University of Rochester , the Harvard- Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics , and researchers at Berkeley and Caltech .
The broader impacts of this project are that it will provide partial support for two Ph.D. students and two or more undergraduate students .
Undergraduate research will lead to the completion of senior thesis projects .
In addition , this research will directly inform an ongoing study of student conceptual understandingof earth processes .
Scientific views of plate tectonic processes continue to evolve in response to research like that proposed here , and these views are the datum to which student ideas must be compared .
This award , provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the Office of Polar Programs , supports a project to investigate the Silicic Acid Leakage Hypothesis as it relates to global carbon dioxide fluctuations during glacial-interglacial cycles.Intellectual MeritThis project will evaluate the burial rate of biogenic opal in the Pacific sector of the Southern Ocean , both during the Last Glacial Maximum ( LGM ) and during the Holocene , as a critical test of the Silicic Acid Leakage Hypothesis .
The Silicic Acid Leakage Hypothesis has been proposed recently to explain the glacial reduction in the carbon dioxide content of the atmosphere that has been reconstructed from Antarctic ice cores .
Vast amounts of dissolved Si ( silicic acid ) are supplied to surface waters of the Southern Ocean by wind-driven upwelling of deep waters .
Today , that dissolved Si is consumed almost quantitatively by diatoms who form skeletal structures composed of biogenic opal ( a mineral form of silicon ) .
According to the Silicic Acid Leakage Hypothesis , environmental conditions in the Southern Ocean during glacial periods were unfavorable for diatom growth , leading to reduced ( compared to interglacials ) efficiency of dissolved Si utilization .
Dissolved Si that was not consumed biologically in the glacial Southern ocean was then exported to the tropics in waters that sink in winter to depths of a few hundred meters along the northern fringes of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current , and return some decades later to the sunlit surface in tropical regions of wind-driven upwelling .
An increase in the amount of dissolved Si that leaks out of the Southern Ocean and later upwells at low latitudes could shift the global average composition of phytoplankton toward a greater abundance of diatoms and fewer CaCO3-secreting taxa ( especially coccolithophorids ) .
Consequences of such a taxonomic shift in the ocean 's phytoplankton assemblage include a ) an increase in the global average organic carbon/calcium carbonate ratio of particulate biogenic material sinking into the deep sea ; b ) a reduction in the preservation and burial of calcium carbonate in marine sediments ; c ) an increase in ocean alkalinity as a consequence of the first two changes mentioned above , and ; d ) a lowering of atmospheric CO2 concentrations in response to increased alkalinity of ocean waters .
A complete assessment of the Silicic acid leakage hypothesis will require an evaluation of ( 1 ) Si utilization efficiencies using newly-developed stable isotopic techniques ; ( 2 ) opal burial rates in low-latitude upwelling regions ; and ( 3 ) opal burial rates in the Southern Ocean .
This project addresses the last of these topics .
Previous work has shown that there was little change in opal burial rate between the LGM and the Holocene in the Atlantic and Indian sectors of the Southern Ocean .
Preliminary results ( summarized in this proposal ) suggest that the Pacific may have been different , however , in that opal burial rates in the Pacific sector seem to have been lower during the LGM than during the Holocene , allowing for the possibility of Si leakage from this region .
However , available results are too sparse to make any quantitative conclusions at this time .
For that reason , we propose to make a comprehensive evaluation of opal burial rates in the Pacific sector of the Southern Ocean .
Significance and Broader ImpactsDetermining the mechanism ( s ) by which the ocean has regulated climate-related changes in the CO2 content of the atmosphere has been the focus of a substantial effort by paleoceanographers over the past two decades .
The Silicic Acid Leakage Hypothesis is a viable new candidate mechanism that warrants further exploration and testing .
Completion of the proposed work will contribute significantly to that effort .
During the course of this work , several undergraduates will be exposed to paleoclimate research through their involvement in this project .
Burckle and Anderson are both dedicated to the education and training of young scientists , and to the recruitment of women and under-represented minorities .
To illustrate , two summer students ( undergraduates ) worked in Burckle 's lab during the summer of 2002 .
One was a woman and the other ( male ) was a member of an under-represented minority .
Anderson and Burckle will continue with similar recruitment efforts during the course of the proposed study .
A minority student who has expressed an interest in working on this research during the summer of 2003 has already been identified .
EsseneEAR- 0230098This work will evaluate magmatic sulfidation and oxidation states in calc-alkaline granitic rocks .
These measurements will be carried out on granitoid suites from the Bingham-Park City belt of Utah , the central Chile porphyry copper belt , and the Providencia-Concepcion del Oro area in the central Sierra Madre Occidental of Mexico .
Calculation of oxygen fugacity ranges over five orders of magnitude and sulfur fugacity over three orders of magnitude in different calc-alkaline granitoids .
Mossbauer determination of Fe3+/Fe2+ and measurement of H2O in biotites will constrain redox reactions for biotite and provide another way to evaluate the redox state of these granitoids .
In addition , systematic determinations of Ce4+/Ce3+ will be undertaken on zircons from the same suites of calc-alkaline granitoids .
It is anticipated that these results will show that the granitoids possessed their unique redox signature throughout their crystallization history .
The oxidation state of the magmas is most likely inherited from source regions rather than being imposed by late stage crystallization , wall-rock contamination , hydrothermal alteration or degassing history .
Results of this study are expected to shed light on the source regions and evolution of calc-alkaline granitoids .
Broader implications of this study relate to ( 1 ) impacts on climate by sulfur-bearing volcanic eruptions that are related to these granitoids , and ( 2 ) formation of porphyry copper ore bodies during their crystallization .
The highly oxidized granitoids have sulfur mainly as sulfate , which is released in major volcanic eruptions to form sulfuric acid .
These releases had a measurable impact on earth 's climate during major eruptions of Mt .
Pinutubo in the Philippines and El Chichon in Mexico .
Porphyry copper ore deposits in the rock record are strongly correlated with emplacement of oxidized granitoids .
Understanding this relationship is important for location of copper ores , most of which occur in these ore deposits .
0230396TaylorPolar ice cores provide critical insights to societally relevant issues and ice core results underpin much of global change research .
The Ice Core Working Group ( which , under the coordination of the National Ice Core Laboratory Science Management Office , provides guidance to the National Science Foundation and the United States Geological Survey on issues pertaining to ice cores ) has recommended a community-wide ice-coring program in West Antarctica at a location referred to as the Inland Site .
A deep ice core from there will enable studies of climate and sea-level change and life in extreme environments , and will help educate many new Earth-system scientists .
This project is for the design , construction and testing of a deep-ice-coring drill , and for other preparations required to recover a deep ice core from the Inland Site .
PROPOSAL NO .
0230088PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR Stone , RobertINSTITUTION NAME University of Missouri-RollaTITLE Striking a Balance between Engineering Science and Engineering Design Development of an Engineering Systems and Design ProgramAbstractThe goal of this project is to develop an undergraduate engineering curriculum that prepares students to work as design engineers at the boundaries of two or more traditional engineering disciplines .
The proposed interdisciplinary program , focusing on engineering systems and engineering design , encompasses the study of theories and methodologies that develop creative solutions to open-ended engineering design problems .
Graduates of this program , called Engineering Systems and Design , will use modern design methodologies , simulation , analysis and optimization techniques to develop safe and functional solutions to complex interdisciplinary design problems while adhering to constraints involving economics , reliability , durability , aesthetics , ethics and social impact ( including legal and environmental issues ) .The increased flexibility incorporated in the Engineering System Design program will appeal to a large number of bright students who are not interested intraditional engineering programs with rigid requirements .
The program will also meet increasing industry demands for broad-based product and systems designers capable of immediately working in interdisciplinary engineering areas such as mechatronics , nanosystems and bioengineering .
Areas of the Southern Ocean have spectacular blooms of phytoplankton during the austral spring and early summer .
One of the dominant phytoplankton species , the haptophyte Phaeocystis antarctica , is a prolific producer of the organic sulfur compound dimethylsulfoniopropionate ( DMSP ) and Phaeocystis blooms are associated with some of the world 's highest concentrations of DMSP and its volatile degradation product , dimethylsulfide ( DMS ) .
Sulfur , in the form of DMS , is transferred from the oceans to the atmosphere and can affect the chemistry of precipitation and influence cloud properties and possibly climate .
DMSP and DMS are also quantitatively significant components of the carbon , sulfur and energy flows in many marine food webs , although very little information is available on these processes in high latitude systems .
This project will study how solar radiation and iron cycling affect DMSP and DMS production by phytoplankton , and the subsequent utilization of these labile forms of organic matter by the microbial food web .
Four interrelated hypotheses will be tested in field-based experiments and in situ observations 1 ) solar radiation , including enhanced UV-B due to seasonal ozone depletion , plays an important role in determining the net ecosystem production of DMS in the Ross Sea ; 2 ) development of shallow mixed layers promotes the accumulation of DMS in surface waters , because of enhanced exposure of plankton communities to high doses of solar radiation ; 3 ) DMSP production and turnover represent a significant part of the carbon and sulfur flux through polar food webs ; 4 ) bloom development and resulting nutrient depletion ( e.g. , iron ) will result in high production rates of DMSP and high DMS concentrations and atmospheric fluxes .
Results from this study will greatly improve understanding of the underlying mechanisms controlling DMSP and DMS concentrations in polar waters , thereby improving our ability to predict DMS fluxes to the atmosphere from this important climatic region .
Both Drs .
Kieber and Kiene actively engage high school , undergraduate and graduate students in their research and are involved in formal programs that target underrepresented groups ( NSF-REU and the American Chemical Society-SEED ) .
This project will continue this type of educational outreach .
The PIs also teach undergraduate and graduate courses and incorporation of research experiences into their classes will enrich student learning experiences .
Professor Steve Leone of University of Colorado is supported by the Experimental Physical Chemistry program to perform experimental studies on alignment and control of small molecules .
The work involves use of shaped ultrafast laser pulses for phase and amplitude control of electron dynamics within bonded species .
This proposal seeks to continue development of experimental methods in this area , this time utilizing triatomic molecules , e.g .
SO2 .
In addition , high rotor states of the Li dimer will be utilized .
Sophisticated genetic algorithms will be explored as a means of tailoring matter-field interactions to optimize a desired outcome .
The work will provide much needed data for theoretical advances in this area.The ability to control molecular processes utilizing lasers could have implications in areas such as quantum information science .
This pioneering study will explore the capabilities and limitations of laser control of molecular events in diatomic and triatomic species .
This award , provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the Office of Polar Programs , supports the construction , population , and operation of an integrated multibeam and geophysical database for the Southern Ocean and Antarctica ( out to roughly the latitude of 45 S ) .
The focus of our efforts will be to make multibeam bathymetry data collected aboard the R/V Palmer available to the community as a resource for science and education .
The database will have strong similarities to the existing NSF supported RIDGE Multibeam database and will build upon that project 's development efforts .
A PostgreSQL relational database server will manage the database .
It will be accessible through two web-based interfaces pages that present a choice of a simple point , click and text-field entry in a browser window ; and a map-based Java applet interface that provides the capability to browse and interact with the database.The main attraction of the database will be access to maps , grids , and edited raw data files from the R/V Palmer multibeam data .
These data have not yet been brought together in a synthesis and are typically only accessible to the small group of researchers aboard the expedition during which the data were collected .
Multibeam data are perhaps unique among the geophysical data types they reveal in exquisite detail a strange , hidden landscape ; they include valuable information on geological processes occurring at the sea floor ; and they are useful to scientists preparing base-maps for their particular studies and as an integrating framework for interdisciplinary work .
These data are acquired at considerable cost to the NSF and represent an important part of the legacy of the Antarctic program as well as a valuable resource for future research activities .
In addition to browsing and downloading multibeam data products , users will be able to interact dynamically with the data .
Capabilities will be provided for generating bathymetric profiles and contour maps , for digitizing and downloading points and lines , and for customizing the map display.In parallel and linked to the multibeam effort , a prototype database will be developed for sub-bottom profile data populated by recently collected ice-penetrating radar data from Lake Vostok .
Available seismic reflection profiles from the ANTOSTRAT compilation and from the National Geophysical Data Center ( NGDC ) in Colorado will also be included .
The map browser will provide access to all the ship-acquired trackline geophysical holdings at Lamont-Doherty and the NGDC , for the Antarctic Digital Gravity Synthesis and for other existing basemap compilations ( e.g .
BEDMAP ) and sample data collections ( e.g .
ODP borehole data , RidgePetDB ) .
Access to all these data types will be provided through the same map browser as the multibeam data , which will allow the user to explore diverse data sets from a single web site.The multibeam and geophysical data synthesis that will be developed under this award is expected to significantly expand the utility of these under-utilized and often hard to find resources for a broad range of users , both academic and lay , who are interested in Antarctic science and fundamental earth processes .
PROPOSAL NO .
0230421PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR Doerry , EckehardINSTITUTION NAME Northern Arizona UniversityTITLE The Global Engineering College Integrating International Training into Engineering EducationAbstractThe most significant development in modern engineering over the last decade has been the increasing globalization of corporate economies .
Today 's engineering graduates are regularly asked to collaborate with colleagues of diverse backgrounds and who are working at sites or with affiliate companies around the world .
Specifically , modern engineering practice requires competence in novel collaboration and communication skills in addition to the technical skills taught in traditional engineering curricula .
These skills include , for example , collaborative teaming and team management skills , cross-cultural communication skills and the ability to perform on geographically distributed teams .
This project will undertake plans to infuse the engineering curriculum with opportunities for international experiences .
Very-Long-Baseline Interferometry ( VLBI ) is one of the most powerful techniques available for the high-resolution imaging of distant radio sources in the universe and for making accurate measurements of the motion of the earth in space .
Multiple radiotelescopes scattered over the surface of the earth simultaneously record data from a radio source at streaming data rates as high as 1 Gbps for a 24-hour period ; the data are then shipped to a central processing site for correlation analysis .
Because the signal-to-noise ratio achieved by VLBI increases with the bandwidth of the observations , there has been a continual effort to increase the captured data rate .
The advent of modern high-speed networks offers the possibility to transport VLBI data electronically with much higher data rates and lower costs to maximize the scientific potential of the observations .
The electronic transmission of VLBI data ( dubbed e-VLBI ) , however , presents a special challenge to the use of high-speed global networks .
New protocols and strategies must be developed so that these applications become efficient high-bandwidth 'background ' users , while not significantly impacting other normal network traffic .
Because many high-speed networks , such as Abilene , are not heavily loaded on an average basis , there is considerable potential for applications of this class to productively use background capacity , promoting better science for fewer dollars .
MIT Haystack Observatory , working jointly with the MIT Laboratory for Computer Science and MIT Lincoln Laboratory , proposes to undertake the following tasks to realize this potential 1 .
Develop and test network protocols and algorithms that take advantage of the special characteristics of real-time scientific instrumentation applications to utilize low-priority bandwidth that is available in fair abundance on many networks .
2 .
Develop a system that can be deployed widely at low cost , that can be easily updated as algorithms improve , and that can track technology evolution to gain higher performance over time .
3 .
Disseminate the work to a broader community .
Planning and Assessing Student Success Mathematics Gateway to STEM Programs and Careers ( PASS Math ) focuses on reviewing and revising developmental and technical mathematics to increase a pool of students interested in science , engineering , math , and technical programs and capable of being successful in those areas at Penn Valley Community College ( PVCC ) and the Business Technology Center ( BTC ) of the Metropolitan Community Colleges ( MCC ) District of Kansas City , MO .
An underlying assumption is that students ' success in math increases when they relate math to other disciplines , engage in mathematics inquiry and problem solving , explore careers ( particularly the STEM careers ) , and learn to communicate mathematically.The PASS Math project is assessing previous projects in mathematics , planning new developmental math pilots , including self-paced options , and planning a developmental math program that is more effective in remediating math students and preparing them for college-level math courses as well as for STEM careers.The intellectual merit of PASS Math is that efforts aim to create a significant increase in students transitioning from developmental mathematics to successful completion of college-level mathematics .
Since mathematics is a significant barrier to completing associates and bachelors degrees , more students are in turn completing college degrees .
By having students explore careers , particularly STEM careers , more students are ready , prepared , and interested in completing degrees in the required programs .
The broader impact of PASS Math is that this model program can be disseminated to other community colleges in the country where almost 800,000 students are enrolled in developmental mathematics .
A summative and formative evaluation provides data on successful activities.Project objectives include ( a ) Students who participate in developmental math pilot projects experience a 50 % better success rate than developmental math students who do not participate in the pilots .
( b ) 65 % of students in developmental math pilots enroll in and successfully complete a college level math course .
( c ) 10 % of the students in the pilots progress to college-level math courses in a shorter period .
( d ) 65 % of minority students in developmental math pilots enroll in and successfully complete a college level-math course .
( e ) 10 % of the minority students in the pilots progress to college-level math courses in a shorter period .
( f ) The number of students courses who enroll in STEM programs doubles .
( g ) The number of minority students who enroll in STEM programs doubles .
This project seeks to increase the number of students receiving baccalaureate degrees in STEM fields at Xavier University .
The pilot program focuses particularly on first-year students in computer science , mathematics , and physics .
The objectives for the project are to increase the numbers of undeclared majors who become majors in computer science , mathematics , or physics by the end of their first year ; to increase the retention rate from first to second year of students who enter Xavier with a declared major in computer science , mathematics , or physics ; to increase the number of underrepresented minorities majoring in computer science , mathematics , and physics , and the number of women in computer science and physics ; and to assess the impact of these efforts so that the successful parts can be expanded to all mathematics and science departments at Xavier after the end of the grant period .
The pilot effort includes components that support both the recruitment of STEM majors from the undecided majors and the retention of incoming STEM majors a first-year STEM exposure program for prospective majors ; an undergraduate teaching assistant program that assigns current majors to be tutors/mentors in the first-year , major-level courses ; a grants program providing funds for computer science , mathematics , and physics students to do student-planned activities aimed at outreach both on- and off-campus ; a summer bridge program to help at-risk students between the first and second years to acquire the mathematical and scientific skills necessary to continue in the major ; and a workshop series for STEM faculty to raise awareness of STEM recruitment and retention issues , particularly those of underrepresented groups .
Current STEM majors are used extensively in the project .
This involvement strengthens the bonds of the existing STEM community and provides essential role models for incoming students .
The project provides an opportunity to test several approaches towards increasing STEM majors in a liberal arts environment , thus providing results that can be used across the nation .
It focuses particularly on approaches that create a supportive learning environment for underrepresented groups in science and mathematics .
The Shackleton Fracture Zone ( SFZ ) in the Drake Passage defines a boundary between low and high phytoplankton waters .
West of Drake Passage , Southern Ocean waters south of the Polar Front and north of the Antarctic continent shelf have very low satellite-derived surface chlorophyll concentrations .
Chlorophyll and mesoscale eddy kinetic energy are higher east of SFZ compared to values west of the ridge .
In situ data from a 10-year survey of the region as part of the National Marine Fisheries Service 's Antarctic Marine Living Resources program confirm the existence of a strong hydrographic and chlorophyll gradient in the region .
An interdisciplinary team of scientists hypothesizes that bathymetry , including the 2000 m deep SFZ , influences mesoscale circulation and transport of iron leading to the observed phytoplankton patterns .
To address thishypothesis , the team proposes to examine phytoplankton and bacterial physiological states ( including responses to iron enrichment ) and structure of the plankton communities from virus to zooplankton , the concentration and distribution of Fe , Mn , and Al , and mesoscale flow patterns near the SFZ .
Relationships between iron concentrations and phytoplankton characteristics will be examined in the context of the mesoscale transport of trace nutrients to determine how much of the observed variability in phytoplankton biomass can be attributed to iron supply , and to determine the most important sources of iron to pelagic waters east of the Drake Passage .
The goal is to better understand how plankton productivity and community structure in the Southern Ocean are affected by the coupling between bathymetry , mesoscale circulation , and limiting nutrient distributions.The research program includes rapid surface surveys of chemical , plankton , and hydrographic properties complemented by a mesoscale station grid for vertical profiles , water sampling , and bottle incubation enrichment experiments .
Distributions of manganese and aluminum will be determined to help distinguish aeolian , continental shelf and upwelling sources of iron .
The physiological state of the phytoplankton will be monitored by active fluorescence methods sensitive to the effects of iron limitation .
Mass concentrations of pigment , carbon and nitrogen will be obtained by analysis of filtered samples , cell size distributions by flow cytometry , and species identification by microscopy .
Primary production and photosynthesis parameters ( absorption , quantum yields , variable fluorescence ) will be measured on depth profiles , during surface surveys and on bulk samples from enrichment experiments .
Viruses and bacteria will be examined for abundances , and bacterial production will be assessed in terms of whether it is limited by either iron or organic carbon sources .
The proposed work will improve our understanding of processes controlling distributions of iron and the response of plankton communities in the Southern Ocean .
This proposal also includes an outreach component comprised of Research Experiences for Undergraduates ( REU ) , Teachers Experiencing the Antarctic and Arctic ( TEA ) , and the creation of an educational website and K-12 curricular modules based on the project .
The over-arching goal of this project is to increase science literacy of general education learners who may not become scientists .
The specific goal of this project is to create a well-researched oceanography course , live and online , widely disseminated , with a modern inquiry based pedagogy .
The design focuses on science literacy using real earth data , collaboration between learners , and a strong connection to societal issues .
The project is based on a successful NSF CCLI pilot project that supported the creation of software and course materials that enables online auto-graded homework assignments , scientific writing activities , on demand grade calculation , and peer interaction , with powerful instructor assessment capability .
It has been tested , refined , and evaluated in two live oceanography classes at the University of California , Santa Barbara ( UCSB ) .
New capability is being created to support the fully online course with collaborative projects with strong peer to peer interactions .
An instructor team consists of faculty from four California community colleges , two California state colleges , two large state universities ( not including UCSB ) , and a small private college .
Yearly workshops support team collaboration and dissemination of technology and pedagogy .
Major themes include the integration of technology in education and faculty development .
This project is having an impact on teacher education and diversity through the composition of the project team , some of whom have been active in teacher preparation and/or teach at campuses with a diverse student population .
PROPOSAL NO .
0230593PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR Nair , SatishINSTITUTION NAME University of Missouri-ColumbiaTITLE Engineering Design in Middle and Secondary Math & Science EducationAbstractThere is increasing consensus for the need to incorporate technological literacy into the curriculum offuture teachers .
Innovative collaborations are necessary to affect such a change .
The Colleges ofEngineering and Education at the University of Missouri-Columbia ( MU ) will lead a meaningful partnership with the Columbia school district , one rural school , an inner city school in Kansas City , a community college , engineering businesses , and the Missouri Department of Elementary and Secondary Education , to develop a strategy to increase the engineering content , with particular focus on design content , in the curriculum of future mathematics and science teachers in the 7-12 th grades , using hands-on engineering exemplars .
The project will also test the hypothesis that engineering design is an ideal domain for reaching under served groups because it utilizes hands-on activities that students find motivating , and it also shows the connection to jobs.The proposed project will help to develop infrastructure for deeper and sustained partnerships , centered on engineering design , among middle and secondary level mathematics and science educators , higher education , industry , and the department of elementary and secondary education of the state .
Theprototype resources developed in the planning grant stage and subsequent larger effort , will be madeavailable to middle and secondary mathematics and science teachers throughout the region , the state , andthe nation , with the expectation that they will utilize them whenever appropriate .
These changes will , in the long term , lead to improved academic performance in mathematics and science , with meaningful engineering design experience , and to an increase in the number of pre-college students who enroll in engineering degree programs .
North Carolina State University ( NCSU ) and North Carolina Agricultural and TechnicalState University ( NC A & T ) are collaborating in developing a program designed toincrease the number of graduates in science , technology , engineering and mathematics ( STEM ) .
Specific program elements include a summer camp at NCSU for graduatinghigh school students who have not selected their majors , summer bridge programs at bothNCSU and NC A & T designed to prepare new STEM students for introductory collegescience and math courses , undergraduate research programs at both schools , tutoring andmentoring of STEM majors and a faculty exchange program between the two campuses.A comprehensive monitoring program is included to track all students in the program andto provide the data required to evaluate each program element .
Success in the programwill result in an increase in the number of STEM graduates , through both an increase inthe number of entering majors and an increase in retention .
Computer forensic systems are large-scale auditing systems that are complementary with on-line intrusion and anomaly detection and have been a relatively understudied field in network security .
Whereas intrusion and anomaly detection systems attempt to do an active on-line analysis of events , forensic systems seek to log all of the information being processed for subsequent , off-line analysis .
For the most part , computer forensics is still an ad-hoc activity that is applied to a system that has already been compromised.Leveraging the advances in computing , networking , and storage systems and building on the work within the IDS community , the project will build an experimental computer forensics system that will allow system administrators , law enforcement officials , and security experts to quickly and easily track down sources of security incidents after they have happened .
There are a number of unique aspects of proposed approach including ( i ) Actively tracking changes to the system being monitored at the operating system kernel level before an attack occurs to capture forensic data ( ii ) Backing the audit information to a locally connected logging host .
This logging host exports only one service the audit trail information from the host being monitored .
All other access to the logging host is allowed only through the console .
Thus , the logging host is a system that will provide extremely detailed system information .
( iii ) A database system to hold logging information .
With an investigation of techniques for populating a database to allow advanced queries on the logging information .
The goal of this is to allow complex queries to be performed while monitoring the system.The main questions to answer as a result of this research are ( i ) Can a scalable proactive logging hosts be built to capture a large number of attacks ?
( ii ) Can database technologies be used to actively mine fore malicious activities ?
( iii ) How can file systems and database technologies be developed to support scalable logging ?
PROPOSAL NO .
0230691PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR Siginer , DennisINSTITUTION NAME Wichita State UniversityTITLE I-SEE Paradigm for Multi-Disciplinary Learning and CollaborationAbstractThe ultimate goal of this implementation project is to develop a plan to produce the multi-disciplinary engineering-team graduate .
This will be a person , who exhibits all the attributes required by the Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology ( ABET ) , along with a new attribute , being collaborative-engineering and team skill savvy .
The implementation project will facilitate transformation of the curriculum from a set of separate unconnected programs and courses to one in which they are connected via a common unifying theme on design .
This transformation involves more than including the design in the courses but also the integration of multiple perspectives into the learning process .
In the planning project , the planning team will devise methods for assisting faculty and students with this transformation .
At the completion of the planning project , the methods and scaffolding will be documented ready for implementation and dissemination.This process will be facilitated in ways that incorporate the best teaching practices validated through current educational research and current research about learning and cognition .
The developing , building and deploying of VRVS2 , a unique , globally scalable next-generation system for real-time collaboration by small workgroups , medium and large teams engaged in research , education and outreach , over an ensemble of national and international networks is proposed .
The collaboration system builds on the existing limited-scale prototype-production system serving the high energy and nuclear physics ( HENP ) community and some other data-intensive science and engineering sectors .
The primary goals of this proposal are to extend the VRVS technology to provide the software infrastructure and Web-enabled user interfaces required to meet the research and education needs of many fields .
VRVS2 will be global in scope , covering the full range of existing and emerging protocols and client devices for daily collaboration , from mobile devices to desktops to installations in large auditoria .
It will be integrated with the Grid-enabled Analysis Environment ( GAE ) now under development at Caltech in partnership with the GriPhyN , iVDGL and PPDG projects in the US , and the DataGrid , DataTAG , Cross Grid projects in Europe .
The current VRVS system has been chosen by the Internet2 Digital Video ( I2-DV ) Initiative as a preferred foundation for the development of advanced video , audio and multimedia collaborative applications by the Internet2 community of US Research and Education schools and labs .
The VRVS2 project will create a testbed video network and develop the necessary middleware to support a set of new and essential requirements for rapid data exchange , and a high level of interactivity in large-scale scientific collaborations including support for emerging standards .
The new design , based on a pure peer-to-peer architecture , will facilitate the monitoring functions as well as provide a high degree of reliability and scalability .
Each VRVS network server , which handles the real-time traffic , will be independent , self-managed by internal monitoring agents , and will interact only with its peer reflector nodes .
The architecture will be fully redundant , with automatic re-routing of packet streams in case one reflector fails , including automatic bandwidth and QoS monitoring ( latency , packet loss , and jitter ) between reflectors , in order to assure the best possible connectivity for real time communication .
A modular and scalable architecture based on web services to provide advanced monitoring and tracking tools that support a very large number of conferences and users will be used .
Networking agents that run on the desktop or at the computer center will allow any videoconferencing client from a protected site with a firewall and/or NAT to communicate with any other client in a public or private remote location .
Authentication and optional encryption will be added to maintain confidentiality of inter-personal communications .
NSF is funding this in the belief that the VRVS2 project may have a profound impact on education , as well as research .
GrunderEAR-0230359 Crustal contamination of melts formed in subduction zones is widely accepted for arcs formed on silicic continental crust , but the potentially profound and likely cryptic effects of contamination by mafic crust are not well understood .
The intellectual merit of the proposed work is the assessment of processes acting in the deep crust above a subduction zone that affect the magmas rising from the mantle .
North Sister volcano of the Cascades volcanic arc is selected for this study because it is the least evolved ( mafic ) and oldest member of an arc volcano suite represented in the Three Sisters volcanoes , and lies in an unusually mafic segment of arc where the primitive , mantle contributions are constrained .
The study 's objectives are ( 1 ) to identify the compositional variety and proportion of regionally distinctive mantle-derived basalts that contributed to the construction of the basaltic andesite at North Sister ; ( 2 ) to evaluate how these mantle inputs mix and interact with the deep crust ; and ( 3 ) to constrain the depth at which the magmatic processes took place .
To achieve these goals we will combine compositional and isotopic analysis of rocks selected to represent the age and mineralogical spectrum of lavas sampled during the course of mapping North Sister Volcano .
Microanalysis of minerals and their melt inclusions will supplement the bulk rock analyses to discern magmatic histories .
Experimental work on natural samples will reveal the pressure , temperature and water conditions under which the North Sister magmas formed .
The broader impact of this work includes training in field , analytical and experimental skills of two graduate students , one of which is female and from an underrepresented groups in science .
Two undergraduates will also be given research opportunities .
The results of the study will be disseminated at national and international meetings and as papers in refereed journals .
Technique development for high-pressure experimental work and melt inclusion analysis by laser ablation will contribute to scientific infrastructure .
The project is a carefully crafted partnership between Oregon State and University of Oregon taking advantage of complementary facilities and investigator expertise .
The proposed work is also of particular societal benefit as it addresses the history of a volcano that is in a particularly active part of the Cascades arc , where recently identified uplift has focused attention on potential volcanic hazards .
The proposed research will document the circulation , variability , and driving mechanisms of the upper ocean in the freshwater switchyard of the Arctic Ocean .
This unexplored region lies to the north of the eastern Canadian Archipelago and Greenland , extending about 500-800 km into the central Arctic Ocean .
It lies just upstream of the freshwater exit points in Fram and Nares Straits , i.e. , where freshwater from various sources is finally delivered to some of the main channels that lead to the North Atlantic Ocean .
The main hypothesis is that this area is a bifurcation point for freshwater transfer between the Arctic and North Atlantic Oceans , and that small changes in the overall circulation of this region may have large downstream effects .
This study will measure ocean temperature , salinity , currents , and geochemical freshwater tracers such as oxygen , oxygen isotopes , tritium/3He , CFC.s , barium , and nutrients .
The focus will be on the upper ocean ( 0-300 m ) where freshwater resides .
This will be an aircraft-based operation , because thick sea ice prevents access by most surface ships and political realities prevent access by submarine .
There will also be a satellite-based study of sea ice motion and thickness in the switchyard region which will determine how much ice recirculates westward within the Beaufort Gyre , how much exits through Fram Strait , and how much exits within the various passages of the Canadian Archipelago .
Results from this study will be made available via an internet web site that will be linked to other similar ongoing projects , as well as through presentations and articles in both scientific and popular formats .
Additionally , they will be used for educational purposes through involvement of both graduate and undergraduate students , and in course material .
A special link to numerical modeling studies is planned via incorporation of our data into a gridded ocean database as well as raw validation data .
The appropriate logistics infrastructure at NSF has been developed over the past several years as part of various projects , in particular the North Pole Environmental Observatory , an aircraft-based project staged out of Alert/Eureka .
This work is the continuation of a joint project with the Polar Research Institute of China to make measurements of the structure of the upper ocean in the northern Weddell Sea along the route taken by the PRI 's antarctic supply vessel , R/V Xue Long .
The observations , obtained from expendable instruments , complement existing hydrographic observations along various transects through the northwestern Weddell Sea region and data from moored current meter arrays in the Weddell-Scotia confluence zone .
This effort builds upon a successful series of expendable bathythermographs and conductivity-temperature-depth probes obtained by the science party on board the R/V Xue Long for the past four years.The west-to-east transit of the Weddell Sea by the ship makes it possible to obtain a series of ocean soundings that are otherwise unobtainable .
The information is particularly important because strong correlative links between the upper ocean temperature and salinity , the sea ice edge , and extra-polar climate features have been established .
It has been shown that the Indian Ocean sector is an anomalous region with respect to connections between antarctic and lower latitude climatic features and indices .
Here the Antarctic Circumpolar Current makes its closest approach to the continent and the Antarctic Circumpolar Wave is least well expressed in the existing data .
The necessary instrumentation , both software and hardware , has been installed in the ship and an excellent working relationship with Chinese antarctic scientists has been developed .
PROPOSAL NO .
0230649PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR Cheung , HarryINSTITUTION NAME University of AkronTITLE Use of a Vertically Integrated Team Design Project as an Adjunct to and Change Instrument for the Chemical Engineering Curriculum at The University of AkronAbstractThis project will explore the use of the Vertically Integrated Team Design Project in an expanded role as a component of the chemical engineering curriculum and as a change instrument for the chemical engineering curriculum.Enhancing the Vertically Integrated Team Design Project as a component of the ChE curriculum byo Increasing and improving the use of outside , industrial mentorso Establishing the Vertically Integrated Team Design Project as an integral part of the core curriculumo Increasing the assessment component of both the students participating in theproject and the project itselfo Developing additional project modules to incorporate emerging technologies asthe project themesPlanning for the use of the Vertically Integrated Team Design Project as a change instrument for the ChE curriculum by using it aso an assessment tool for specific affective and technical skills in our studentso a collaborative vehicle for involvement of industrial colleagues in shaping theChE curriculumo a test bed for incorporating professional level computational tools into the coreChE curriculumo a test bed for material and methods intended to displace rote solution legacymaterials and methods in the core ChE curriculumWe believe that this use of a Vertically Integrated Team Design Project will provide a tool for continuous improvement of our department 's chemical engineering curriculum , the model should be very easily extensible to other chemical engineering departments and easily extensible to other engineering disciplines .
EAR-0230319WentzcovitchTranslating the record of deep-seated geological processes as revealed by seismic structure or xenoliths requires sophisticated knowledge of the essential physics , chemistry , and atomic scale structure of minerals at high pressures and temperatures .
Over the course of their prior collaborative project , the investigators have developed a new approach to the study of mantle materials based on density functional theory that is complementary to experimental efforts in mineral physics .
They have shown that theory can provide insights into the fundamentals of material behavior that form the basis of our ability to interpolate among and extrapolate from necessarily limited experimental or theoretical results to a complex earth .
The investigators past studies of pure end-member phases have predicted properties that have lent important new insight into the nature of the earth 's interior .
In this proposal , they move toward considering the interaction between mantle minerals through phase transitions and chemical exchange.This research will pursue for the first time with ab initio methods the theoretical investigation of mantle solid solutions , including their structure , thermochemistry , and physical properties , and of phase equilibria , .
The investigators will also continue with established directions including the prediction of thermoelastic properties .
This research is expected to contribute to our understanding of 1 ) The origins of lateral heterogeneity in the mantle , through predictions of the effects of temperature and composition on the elastic properties of solid solutions , including Mg-Ca-Al-Fe perovskite at lower mantle conditions .
2 ) The origin , structure , and geodynamical consequences of seismic discontinuities , through predictions of one-component and multi-component phase equilibria including the akimotoite to perovskite transition , and the pseudobinary ringwoodite to perovskite plus magnesiowustite transition .
3 ) The interpretation of samples of possible transition zone and lower mantle origin , through predictions of phase equilibira and element partitioning among major coexisting phases , including Mg-Ca partitioning and exsolution in silicate perovskite. -- BartonEAR-0230091This work will study arc magmatism and hydrothermal activity in a 75x30x10 km block of the upper crust in central Arizona .
The area has exceptional 3-D exposure due to the topographic relief , arid climate , and extensional fault rotation .
This area presents an exceptional opportunity to study shallow ( < 10 km ) magmatic systems , and address near versus far-field controls on mineralization , hydrothermal systems , and styles of magmatic evolution .
We hope to develop a picture of the evolution of large magmatic centers in arc settings .
The work will focus on geologic mapping , structural reconstruction , geochronology , and petrology of contrasting Laramide centers in the Tortilla and Dripping Spring Mountains .
This area encompasses the Ray , Globe-Miami , and Superior mining districts .
Mapping will resolve the distribution , timing , and character of igneous , metamorphic , and hydrothermal features .
Using these results , pre-extension geometries will be reconstructed and linked to industry and USGS studies .
Magmatic and hydrothermal events will be constrained with U-Pb , Ar-Ar , and Re-Os dating and whole rock , mineral , isotope and fluid inclusion studies .
Broader impacts include education of post-doctoral , graduate and undergraduate students , collaborations with the USGS and the mining industry , and improved exploration models for porphyry copper and related ore deposits .
The colonial prymnesiophyte Phaeocystis antarctica is a major bloom-forming alga in Antarctic shelf waters ; where , alongside diatoms , it is considered a keystone species in its impact on regional biogeochemical cycling and ecosystem structure .
Iron levels in these waters fall to values as low as ~0.1 nM during the mid to late summer , concentrations that are likely to limit the growth of phytoplankton , including P. antarctica .
However , in contrast to diatoms , very little work has been conducted to examined the effects of iron , or the combined effects of iron and irradiance , on the growth , physiology and biochemical composition of P. antarctica .
In this project , P. antarctica will be collected from the southern Ross Sea and grown in semi-continuous batch cultures for use in experiments at the University of Charleston to investigate the effects of iron availability and irradiance on the growth rate , cellular iron quota , buoyancy , biogenic sulfur production , pigment content , redox-protein expression , and photosynthetic efficiency of P. antarctica .
Phaeocystis antarctica is known to have a significant impact on the regional biogeochemical cycles of carbon , nutrient elements and sulfur in the Ross Sea , over timescales ranging from seasonal to interannual .
This species may have also played a central role in the inferred basin- scale changes in biogeochemical cycles linked to glacial-interglacial climatic change .
Thus it is important to develop a mechanistic understanding of the factors that control the growth , physiology and biochemical composition of P. antarctica , in order to better understand the biogeochemical ecology of the Ross Sea and the wider Southern Ocean , and the possible linkages with regional and global climate .
Together with the results of recent and ongoing field and modeling studies , the information provided by these laboratory experiments will substantially improve our ability to predict how the Antarctic region will be affected by and modulate future climate change .
The objective of the project is to create an innovative learning environment that addresses the challenges of teaching stochastic modeling courses to undergraduate engineering and science students .
The project develops four application-based modules to demonstrate the relevance of theory in practice and incorporates real-life applications into Industrial Engineering curriculum .
The modules include visual media from industrial partners to present a problem with a web site that provides written module and reference material .
The main topics covered in these modules include Brownian motion , reliability theory , queuing theory , Markov chains , and renewal theory.Outcomes of this project consist of improved learning environment , exposure of students to technological tools , integration of advanced technology in the design and creation of the modules , and a curriculum package that is highly transferable to other programs and universities offering stochastic modeling courses .
EAR-0230154Lars StixrudeTranslating the record of deep-seated geological processes as revealed by seismic structure or xenoliths requires sophisticated knowledge of the essential physics , chemistry , and atomic scale structure of minerals at high pressures and temperatures .
Over the course of their prior collaborative project , the investigators have developed a new approach to the study of mantle materials based on density functional theory that is complementary to experimental efforts in mineral physics .
They have shown that theory can provide insights into the fundamentals of material behavior that form the basis of our ability to interpolate among and extrapolate from necessarily limited experimental or theoretical results to a complex earth .
The investigators past studies of pure end-member phases have predicted properties that have lent important new insight into the nature of the earth 's interior .
In this proposal , they move toward considering the interaction between mantle minerals through phase transitions and chemical exchange.This research will pursue for the first time with ab initio methods the theoretical investigation of mantle solid solutions , including their structure , thermochemistry , and physical properties , and of phase equilibria , .
The investigators will also continue with established directions including the prediction of thermoelastic properties .
This research is expected to contribute to our understanding of 1 ) The origins of lateral heterogeneity in the mantle , through predictions of the effects of temperature and composition on the elastic properties of solid solutions , including Mg-Ca-Al-Fe perovskite at lower mantle conditions .
2 ) The origin , structure , and geodynamical consequences of seismic discontinuities , through predictions of one-component and multi-component phase equilibria including the akimotoite to perovskite transition , and the pseudobinary ringwoodite to perovskite plus magnesiowustite transition .
3 ) The interpretation of samples of possible transition zone and lower mantle origin , through predictions of phase equilibira and element partitioning among major coexisting phases , including Mg-Ca partitioning and exsolution in silicate perovskite .
PROPOSAL NO .
0230625PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR Ellis , GlennINSTITUTION NAME Smith CollegeTITLE Building an Engineering Education PartnershipABSTRACTBuilding an Engineering and Education PartnershipSmith College Proposal to Bridges for Engineering Education , NSF-02-092 The Smith College Picker Engineering Program , Department of Education and Child Study , and Office of Educational Outreach propose to build upon an innovative partnership they have already established to enhance the quality and expand the reach of engineering education preK-16 .
The first goal is to integrate engineering into the Smith Department of Education and Child Study program by a ) developing a certification program in technology/engineering , and b ) designing a certificate program for elementary school engineering education .
The second goal is to develop best educational practices in the Picker Engineering Program by expanding the role of an expert educator in the curriculum development process .
The third goal is to enhance engineering educational outreach at Smith College by developing engineering education teacher resources and by expanding the engineering education course for teachers .
These goals respond to national calls for science education reform ( preK-12 ) and for the integrating engineering education into the preK-12 curriculum ; to the call for engineering education reform at the college and university level ; and , to the grave need to recruit and retain women and underrepresented minorities in science , engineering , and technology fields in our nation 's workforce .
PROPOSAL NO .
0230734PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR Pezeshki , CharlesINSTITUTION NAME Washington State UniversityTITLE Engineering Informatics , An Integrated Approach Toward Analysis and DesignAbstractThis proposal describes an approach to implement a mechanical and materials engineering informatics .
environment for education , integrating the diverse disciplines present in the field of mechanics , materials , heat transfer , thermodynamics , fluid mechanics , dynamics , and control systems around a common set of problems and design issues centered on MEMS technology .
In order to implement this curriculum overhaul , planning monies are requested for four essential thrusts .
These are Identifying key software that can be used with current coursework that will facilitate understanding of fundamental physical phenomena .
Training faculty in the use of that software so that all faculty have a baseline competence with current engineering tools in their discipline .
Developing a set of canonical examples for each discipline that are easy-to-use , error-free , appropriate for visualizing the desired physical principle , have some ability to be modified parametrically for use in design studies , and also have some degree of hierarchical parentage so that they can be used for ABET evaluation purposes .
Developing a database , accessible over the Internet , for use in our distance education program that enables students in both our main campus and branch campus environments to complete examples and share results with both professors and fellow students .
Implementation of such a curriculum change would enable the university to mimic the most sophisticated design/build processes present in industry today at minimal cost , the university equivalent of the .paperless airplane.. Further , it is the environment that our students will be practicing in as sophisticated software becomes ubiquitous in the next ten years .
Modern science is a distributed wide-area enterprise , requiring real-time coordination of scientific instruments and remote sensors , computational resources , large data repositories and teams of researchers in different locations , even on different continents .
The high-bandwidth networking demands of any such real-time and data-intensive collaborations tax the largest network pipes , and when conducted across the Internet , their Gigabit/sec data streams must utilize heterogeneous platforms with network link speeds that vary from 10Gbps to 10Mbps and with end user machines that range from desktop PCs to large supercomputers .
However , effective scientific collaboration demands that team members be able to interact with each other and with critical remote resources in real-time , despite platform heterogeneity and despite dynamic variations in the availability of platform resources.The key idea of the NetReact middleware services is to utilize the substantial server and processing resources associated with distributed collaborations to improve end user performance and compensate for potential deficiencies in network capabilities .
NetReact provides rich functionality for dynamically reconfiguring both middleware and applications in response to network and platform monitoring , and to coordinate ( 1 ) middleware and application-level reactions to changes in network state with ( 2 ) the possibly simultaneous actions taken at the transport level .
NetReact 's monitoring ( NRM ) services dynamically determine available network bandwidth and communication latencies .
NetReact uses such information to adjust middleware and application actions , to tune the underlying network transport , and even to dynamically select suitable network paths for ongoing middleware-enabled scientific collaborations .
By embedding NetReact services into the grid computing middleware commonly used for scientific collaboration , the functionality of such NetReact-enriched middleware is improved substantially , enabling end users to collaborate in real-time even when they do not have access to high end machines or high capacity network links , thereby supporting scientific applications that currently remain out of reach for existing networking and grid computing technologies .
This study will examine mechanisms of how organisms sense environmental changes , and how they adapt to cope with these changes by turning on specific genes that give them new physiological abilities .
The focus is on crustaceans .
Euryhaline crustaceans are those that tolerate a wide range of salt concentrations in water , from the open ocean to freshwater rivers .
In general , they do so by taking up salts ( sodium and chloride ) , thus maintaining constant concentrations of vital blood salts .
The molecular basis of this ability is a suite of transport proteins that are expressed in the gill .
A number of proteins have been identified that are responsible for the transport of individual ions .
The mechanism of transport usually involves the uptake of a vital ion in exchange for the ionic form of a waste product ( e.g. , Na+/H+ and Cl-/HCO3- exchange ) .
The waste products are produced from the reaction of CO2 and water , which is catalyzed by the enzyme carbonic anhydrase ( CA ) .
Because H+ and HCO3- are used in exchange for cations and anions in general , CA is believed to be a central support enzyme in the overall mechanism of ion uptake .
Furthermore , the expression of CA is up-regulated when these organisms are exposed to low salinity .
Preliminary evidence indicates that the regulatory mechanism is present only in euryhaline species and that it is under inhibitory control by a CA repressor ( believed to be a neuropeptide ) found in the major endocrine system of crustaceans , the X-organ/sinus gland complex .
This peptide will be identified by HPLC , and its action on CA expression investigated through the use of quantitative PCR and reporter enzyme assays .
This research also has broader impacts , because estuaries are highly productive environments , and one species being studied is economically important ( e.g. , Callinectes sapidus ) whereas the other ( Carcinus maenas ) is an invasive species that has been both ecologically and economically disruptive .
The project will also involve the training of undergraduate students , graduate students , and postdoctoral associates in all phases of the research .
This is a multifaceted initiative by the Mathematical Association of America to strengthen the mathematical education of teachers , responding to the growing list of national reports that call for better preparation of the nation 's mathematics teachers .
These reports and their recommendations come at a time of growing interest among college and university mathematicians to do more to contribute to improved elementary and secondary school mathematics teaching .
Many college faculty need assistance with appropriate instructional strategies to help future K-12 teachers connect their college mathematics to K-12 mathematics .
Further , college faculty need better information about the mathematical issues that arise in day- to-day K-12 classroom lessons .
This initiative nurtures and supports a growing connection between college faculty and K-12 teachers by providing educational , organizational , and financial assistance to mathematical scientists with specific interest in teacher education .
Numerous connections and collaborations with other mathematical science organizations and projects are being pursued and developed to enhance the initiative .
This initiative also assists efforts by mathematicians to run professional development programs for practicing teachers .
It takes a broad , systemic approach to improving the preparation of K-12 mathematics teachers , commensurate with the major , long-term impact that is sought on mathematicians and the mathematical education of teachers .
The initiative targets more than just the mathematics faculty who teach courses in the foundations of elementary or secondary school mathematics , because future teachers are strongly influenced by other courses they take in mathematics .
The Preparing Mathematicians to Education Teachers ( PMET ) initiative has four components 1 .
Faculty Training a series of workshops , from one to four weeks , spread over two summers with intervening academic year projects ; and mini-courses of 3-8 hours in length ; 2 .
Information and Resources articles in professional journals , panels at professional meetings , multi-media websites , and hard-copy material dissemination to support faculty instruction for teachers ; 3 .
Mini-grants support for grassroots innovation in teacher education at individual campuses ; and 4 .
Regional Networks coordination of efforts at individual institutions This research proposes to assess the role of atmospheric forcing in linking land hydrology in the watersheds of the Lena , Yana , Indigirka and Kolyma rivers with the transport and fate of riverine waters to the Laptev and East Siberian seas .
The underlying hypothesis couples elements of Arctic climate change , such as cyclone frequency and warming , with permafrost melting and increased river runoff that lead , in turn , to increased flux of dissolved and solid terrestrial matter to the shelf seas .
It is hypothesized , additionally , that shifts between the cyclonic and anticyclonic modes of atmospheric circulation over the central Arctic , in response to the phasing of the Arctic Oscillation ( AO ) , drive environmental shifts in the Laptev and East Siberian seas .
These hypotheses will be tested through acquisition , syntheses and analyses of atmospheric , land and ocean hydrological , and hydrochemical data for the Lena River-Laptev Sea and East Siberian land-shelf systems .
The research will involve analyses of two existing sets of frozen water , sediment and particulate matter samples obtained in 2000 and 2002 from the Laptev and East Siberian seas .
This study will use an integrated observing system that will provide year-round measurements of volume , liquid freshwater and ice fluxes across Davis Strait .
Fluxes through the Strait represent the net integrated Canadian Archipelago through flow , modified by terrestrial inputs and oceanic processes during its southward transit through Baffin Bay .
This study will be part of a coordinated international effort to quantify ( and eventually monitor ) the variability of fluxes connecting the Arctic and Atlantic Oceans and to understand the role played by the Arctic and sub-Arctic in steering decadal scale climate variability , The system will employ complementary techniques , combining mature technologies with recent developments in autonomous gliders ( presently undertaking their first extended science missions ) to address all aspects of flow through Davis Strait , including some measurements that have not previously been technologically feasible .
The components of the proposed system include A sparse array of subsurface moorings , each instrumented with an upward looking sonar , an Acoustic Doppler Current Profiler ( ADCP ) and a single conductivity-temperature ( CT ) sensor .
These will provide a time series of upper ocean currents , ice velocity and ice thickness .
These measurements will then be used to estimate the ice component of freshwater flux , provide an absolute velocity reference for geostrophic shears calculated from Seaglider hydrographic sections , and derive error estimates for lower-frequency flux calculations .
Trawl and iceberg resistant bottom landers , instrumented with ADCPs and CT sensors , will be deployed across the Baffin and Greenland shelves to quantify variability associated with strong , narrow coastal flows .
Acoustically navigated Seagliders will provide year-round , repeated , high-resolution hydrographic sections across the Strait .
The combination of emerging and existing technologies implemented in the observing system may serve as a prototype for accurate long-term monitoring of freshwater and ice fluxes in high latitude environments subject to seasonal or permanent ice cover .
Acoustically navigated autonomous gliders capable of extended missions in ice covered environments will provide a significant new observational tool , opening important regions of high latitude oceans to intensive measurement programs .
The project will investigate the dynamical mechanisms maintaining tropopause height and its permeability in the extratropical latitudes .
Understanding the formation , maintenance , and kinematics of the midlatitude tropopause remains a core , challenging problem in dynamic meteorology .
Recent interest in its dynamic permeability stems from its considerable impact on transport of chemical constituents , including ozone and water vapor , between the troposphere and stratosphere .
Dr. Nakamura ( U of Chicago ) will investigate the problem both theoretically and numerically .
Numerical calculations with quasi-geostrophic and general circulation models will expand the theoretical analysis of the advection-diffusion equation to more realistic scenarios , including one involving penetration of the tropopause by the eddy potential vorticity fluxes .
The project will advance theoretical understanding of the dynamical interaction of the troposphere and stratosphere , and should provide separate estimates of the stratosphere-to-troposphere , and troposphere-to-stratosphere mass transfers , which will improve modeling and prediction of cross-tropopause transports of trace gases and substances .
This award , provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the Office of Polar Programs , supports a project to investigate the role of the Southern Ocean in regulating atmospheric carbon dioxide ( CO2 ) during glacial-interglacial cycles .
The polar Southern Ocean is the primary region where the deep-sea exchanges carbon dioxide ( CO2 ) with the atmosphere due to shoaling of very-cold seawater to the near-surface layer .
Consequently , of the numerous theories that have been advanced to explain oceanic control of atmospheric CO2 , most of those that remain viable point to a dominant role for this region .
Increasing consumption of upwelled CO2 and nutrients ( e.g .
increasing export production ) or decreasing rates of supply to the surface ( e.g .
increasing stratification or sea-ice cover ) may thus be responsible for reduced atmospheric CO2 during glacial maxima .
Since at present only a small fraction of available macronutrients ( nitrates and phosphates ) are consumed in Southern Ocean surface waters , either scenario would produce a substantial increase in relative nutrient utilization , thus making it a master variable.The history of Southern Ocean surface nutrient utilization will be reconstructed for the last 60,000 years at three Ocean Drilling Program ( ODP ) sites that span the polar front .
These remarkable Atlantic sector sites have continuous , high sediment accumulation rates ( > 15 centimeters per thousand years ( cm/kyr ) ) for the entire period to be studied .
They are also unique for the Southern Ocean in being within the modern zone of high biogenic opal content as well as having sufficient foraminiferal abundance for oxygen isotope chronostratigraphy .
Centennial resolution will be achieved over the past 60,000 years to determine phasing with changes in climate and atmospheric CO2 to within 500 years with emphasis on millennial-scale events between 20,000 and 60,000 years ago as well as the last glacial termination .
Since sea-ice has been implicated as a driving mechanism , detailed comparisons will also be made for existing sea-ice proxy data from the ODP sites as well as the Vostok ice core climate and CO2 record .
Nitrogen isotopic ratio will be the primary proxy for nutrient utilization , which has been verified in detail through studies of the modern Southern Ocean .
To avoid artifacts associated with organic matter diagenesis , we will conduct analyses primarily on diatom-frustule bound organic matter .
The three ODP sites have relatively high biogenic opal content over the time period of interest .
Though not completely unambiguous , diatom carbon isotopic data obtained at no extra cost will be useful for constraining possible scenarios particularly since it will be obtained synoptically with the other tracer data .
It will reflect primarily changes in surface CO2 and/or diatom growth rate .
In collaboration with Dr. Christina De La Rocha ( Cambridge U .
) , silicon isotopes will be measured on a subset of the samples analyzed for nitrogen and carbon isotopic ratio .
To achieve the best possible chronology for nutrient utilization for the last 40,000 years , we will explore radiocarbon dating of diatom frustule-bound organic matter using preparation methodology recently developed by John Hayes ' group at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution ( WHOI ) Accelerator Mass Spectrometry ( AMS ) facility .
Subsets of samples analyzed for nitrogen , carbon , and silicon isotopic ratio will be sent to WHOI for sample preparation and AMS radiocarbon analysis .
This approach not only permits dating of critical intervals where there is insufficient foram material for radiocarbon dating but also ensures that the dates obtained pertain directly to our nutrient utilization record .
Verification of this new method will be made at each site by dating diatom frustules and forams from the same sediment depths where the latter are sufficiently abundant.The following major hypotheses will be tested # 1 Southern Ocean surface relative nutrient utilization is the primary driver of past changes in atmospheric CO2 and hence global climate change. # 2 Seasonal sea ice cover is an important regulator of Southern Ocean relative nutrient utilization and CO2 providing a positive feedback between Antarctic and global climate. # 3 Glacial reduction of the silicate to nitrate utilization ratio resulted in elevated silicate in Subantarctic surface waters , northward movement of opal-rich sediments , and changes in the nutrient composition of intermediate waters formed in polar frontal region .
Over the last several years , the critical need to bolster participation in science at all levels in the United States has become an issue of national concern .
As the number of people trained in highly technical fields in the sciences , mathematics and engineering grows , there is evidence to suggest that students who have aptitude and interest in the sciences and mathematics often become disillusioned with their college-level studies and opt for majors in non-science disciplines .
These students abandon potentially promising careers in science , technology , engineering and mathematics ( STEM ) fields because of inadequate preparation during their high school years , feelings that they can not compete , inadequate and/or poor advising by college faculty , and disinterest in university-level general education classes in STEM fields .
A most harmful part of this trend is that many students make decisions to leave STEM majors during their first year of college when they have not yet had the opportunity to develop strong ties with STEM departments .
This loss of talent is detrimental not only to the intellectual capital that is a source of national pride but also to the nation 's ability to maintain the high standard of living that is one by-product of a technologically-advanced economy .
The solution to this problem lies , in part , in the ability of colleges and universities to restructure science and mathematics courses and majors .
To address this problem in which promising students switch to non-scientific majors early in their college education , funding is requested for a three-year initiative that has as its overarching goal to recruit and retain promising students in STEM majors .
Our approach is to develop a pilot project that consists of three parts ( 1 ) a Summer Science Institute for high school students ; ( 2 ) a Freshman Year Science Seminar Series , and ( 3 ) a Sophomore Year Independent Research Experience .
At the heart of each of these programs are common themes , including introducing students to the joys of scientific discovery and the nature of team-based interdisciplinary research , informing students about exciting career choices in STEM fields , exposing them to the rich history of scientific thought and discovery , and providing them with the tools and support structure they need to complete a baccalaureate degree in one or more STEM disciplines .
We integrate practices that have been shown to be effective in improving participation , including close mentoring , extracurricular activities , development of a cohort , inclusion of parents , and professional development for faculty .
According to recent studies , the problem of first-year flight disproportionately impacts women , minorities , low-income , and/or first-generation students .
For this reason , our recruiting efforts are concentrate on these target groups.This pilot program has been carefully overseen and assessed by an Advisory Board chaired by the chief academic officer of Central Washington University , Provost/Senior Vice President David Soltz .
Assessment is coordinated by Associate Professor of Science Education and Chemistry Martha Kurtz and Vice Provost and Professor of Curriculum and Supervision Linda Beath .
Twice per year , goals , assessment strategies and benchmarks are reviewed in order to improve the program .
Should our approach be successful , full scale implementation at CWU would rely on funding from private sources and redirection of internal resources .
Because our proposed program relies on themes and resources that are fundamental to most colleges and universities , we anticipate that other STEM groups could adopt our program , thereby increasing its impact from a local to a national scope .
Central Washington University is well poised to support a program that stresses outreach to minority populations , careful mentoring , and inquiry-based , interdisciplinary academic programs .
CWU emphasizes small class size , close professional relationships between faculty and students , and a culture that rewards innovative , inquiry-based teaching and learning .
The University has a strong , well-supported program in undergraduate research and creative expression , and strengths in education promote effective use of assessment strategies .
This project reflects a collaborative effort among 11 faculty in six College of the Sciences departments .
Co-PIs include Wendy Bohrson ( Geological Sciences ) , Michael Braunstein ( Physics ) , Eric Bullock ( Chemistry ) , Carey Gazis ( Geological Sciences ) , Lisa Ely ( Geological Sciences ) , Ed Gellenbeck ( Computer Sciences ) , Stephen Glasby ( Mathematics ) , Martha Kurtz ( Science Education and Chemistry ) , Steven Lundblad ( Geological Sciences ) , Andy Piacsek ( Physics ) , and Holly Pinkart ( Biological Sciences ) .
0128826LeoneThis two-year award for US-France collaboration in experimental physical chemistry and quantum information science involves researchers and students at the University of Colorado and the Aime Cotton Laboratory in Orsay , France .
Stephen R. Leone in the US and Christian Jurgen in France lead this collaboration of experimentalists and theorists .
The objective of their combined efforts is to investigate Rydberg molecular packets of complex sodium or lithium compounds ( dimers ) or nobelium as potential sources for quantum information .
The US group will assemble and prepare molecular wave packets with ultrafast pulsed lasers in order to construct coherent superpositions of states .
Pairs of superposition states , called qubits , will then be used to investigate algorithms proposed for quantum information science .
The French investigators will provide the theoretical expertise to identify the states involved and to interpret the complex wave packet dynamics .
This collaboration advances understanding of research in laser control of chemical reactions and molecular spectroscopy .
The new knowledge will be used in quantum information science , optical communications , and femtosecond laser optics .
The collaboration advances research training of graduate students and provides them with opportunities to establish international partnerships early in their careers .
This award represents the US side of parallel proposals to the NSF and the CNRS .
NSF will cover travel funds and living expenses for the US investigator , postdoctoral researcher and students .
The CNRS will support visits by French researchers and students to the United States .
This project continues the researchers ' program of research on children 's false memories .
That program of research is theory-driven , and to date , it has produced a number of new findings about false memories that were originally predicted on theoretical grounds .
This project consists of three large-scale developmental experiments .
The experiments focus on two cognitive operations that are believed to be key controlling factors in children 's false-memory reports recollection rejection and phantom recollection .
The existence of both operations is predicted by the researchers ' theoretical account of false memory ( i.e. , fuzzy-trace theory ) , and evidence of the use of both operations by adults has been reported in previous experiments .
Recollection rejection is an operation that suppresses the reporting of false events that are consistent with the gist of children 's experience .
Suppression is accomplished via the detection of mismatches between false-but-gist-consistent events and verbatim traces of actual events .
For instance , after hearing a narrative containing the statement The bird is inside the cage and The cage is under the table , children could reject the unpresented statement The bird is under the table by retrieving verbatim traces of either presented sentence and noticing that the words bird and table do not appear together in the sentence .
Phantom recollection , on the other hand , is an operation that supports the reporting of false events that are consistent with the gist of children 's experience by generating illusory vivid phenomenologies for those events .
Fuzzy-trace theory posits that gist memories sometimes cause false events to be accompanied by illusory vivid phenomenologies that are difficult to distinguish from the vivid phenomenologies that accompany true events .
These phantom recollections cause things that were not experienced to be remembered as physical occurrences ( e.g , they are seen in the mind 's eye or heard in the mind 's ear ) .
Fuzzy-trace theory predicts that phantom recollection can occur when two conditions are met ( a ) Experienced events repeatedly cue some familiar meaning , so that gist memories of that meaning are very strong , and ( b ) the false events that provoke phantom recollection are especially good retrieval cues for strong gist memories .
The experiments implement a new paradigm , conjoint recognition .
This paradigm provides a reliable behavioral method of measuring recollection rejection and phantom recollection in children .
Children respond to memory tests under three types of instructions ( accept only experienced events , accept only nonexperienced events that are consistent with the gist of experience , and accept experienced events + nonexperienced events that are consistent with the gist of experience ) .
Recollection rejection and phantom recollection are identified with distinct patterns of responses across these different types of instructions .
A mathematical model that is defined over the paradigm corrects raw response patterns for the influence of extraneous variables , which allows researchers to separate and quantify the effects of recollection rejection and phantom recollection .
Implementation of this paradigm generates detailed findings on how recollection rejection and phantom recollection affect false-memory reports , on how these operations change with age , and on how they react to forensically-significant task variables .
In Experiment 1 , the effects of recollection rejection and phantom recollection on spontaneous false memories of narratives are studied in younger children ( 4- and 5-year-olds ) , older children ( 10- and 11-year-olds ) , and adults .
Experiment 1 also determines how the two operations react to five forensically-significant task variables ( repetition of events , recency of events , order of memory tests , timing of memory tests , and repetition of memory tests ) .
Fuzzy-trace theory makes predictions about each of these variable 's effects on recollection rejection and phantom recollection .
In Experiment 2 , the effects of recollection rejection and phantom recollection on implanted false memories of narratives are studied at the same three age levels by interpolating a memory-suggestion procedure following narrative presentation .
Experiment 2 includes the same five task variables as Experiment 1 .
The aim of Experiment 3 is to determine how well the results of Experiments 1 and 2 generalize to more naturalistic eyewitness situations .
The narrative false-memory procedure is replaced by a standardized quasi-forensic task involving a misdemeanor theft .
The effects of recollection rejection and phantom recollection on both spontaneous and implanted false memories are assessed with this eyewitness procedure .
The same three age levels are studied , and the design includes three of the five task variables that figure in Experiments 1 and 2 ( repetition of events , timing of memory tests , and repetition of memory tests ) .
EAR-0230176Karato and WenkThis award will partially support a workshop entitled Plastic deformation of minerals and rocks , which is to be held in December 4th and 5th of 2002 , in Berkeley , California .
The two-day workshop is one of the series organized by Mineralogical Society of America .
A total of 13 invited presentations ( 16 invited speakers ) are currently on the agenda .
Reflecting the interdisciplinary nature of this area of science , among these 16 invited speakers , three are from materials science community and two are from geodynamics.The main purpose of this workshop is to provide students and scientists alike an opportunity to learn the current status of plastic deformation of minerals and rocks .
There have been major progresses in the study of plastic deformation in minerals and rocks during the last 20 years or so .
They include the extension of experimental studies to a wider range of conditions and the development of theoretical models of deformation including the modeling of deformation microstructures .
But there has been little opportunity to bring these developments together to allow students and scientists in Earth sciences to learn the current progresses to make significant advances in Earth sciences .
This workshop will provide such an opportunity that is needed for the healthy development of solid Earth sciences particularly solid Earth geodynamics .
The next explosive growth in networks will come from connecting together billions of low cost , low power sensors , effectors , and smart devices .
These will be communicating primarily through wireless means for reasons of mobility , ease of deployment , aesthetics , and cost .
Even if such networks start out as special purpose local networks , people anticipate that they will come together in many ways .
They will certainly be interconnected with each other through gateways to the broader wired Internet .
The goal in this proposed project is to find the right architecture to enable Internet-like gains in the new context of wireless connectivity .
In order for wireless networks to support a wide range of applications and be suitable for mass deployment , they will need to posses the following characteristics ( 1 ) negligible interference that allows peaceful co-existence with other independent wireless systems operating over the shared spectrum ; ( 2 ) managing interference between nodes to efficiently and fairly share bandwidth ; ( 3 ) dynamic and energy efficient routing and packet relaying algorithms that support mobility of network nodes ; ( 4 ) scalability to support a large number of heterogeneous devices and links ; ( 5 ) precise positioning capabilities to provide location information for the devices for which this is important ; ( 6 ) robust and energy efficient network protocols that tolerate failure of some network nodes ; ( 7 ) extremely low power wireless transceivers to ensure longevity for the energy-limited nodes ; and ( 8 ) small and low cost wireless transceivers to enable widespread deployment .
This proposal is to study the above in the context of ultra-wideband ( UWB ) wireless signaling and multi-hop routing .
Research is intended to achieve multiple objectives , Develop ( 1 ) Efficient algorithms to determine the fundamental tradeoffs involved in tracking the positions of devices within a network of heterogeneous nodes ; ( 2 ) Robust and efficient protocols for routing digital communications within such networks and explore the fundamental capacity limits of such systems ; ( 3 ) Distributed signal processing algorithms that are network-energy and position aware to take advantage of correlations at the application layer to reduce resource consumption throughout the network hierarchy ; ( 4 ) Extremely low power , highly integrated single-chip CMOS architecture to UWB transceivers , and ( 5 ) An integrated test environment by combining an in-house FPGA-based testbed ( as the digital back-end ) with UWB analog front-end from AetherWire Inc .
This will ultimately have approximately 30 UWB nodes from Aether Wire Inc. to test and therefore further discover issues involved with such networks .
This project focuses on the engineering of biopolymeric materials for application in materials science and biology .
Nature regularly uses precise control of macromolecular structure to impart function ; the exquisite information storage , hierarchical assembly , and catalytic properties of natural molecules such as nucleic acids and proteins have long been admired by the polymer chemist .
Despite the many advances in the chemical synthesis of polymers , no synthetic method offers the sequence and structural control afforded by protein polymer production by in vivo methods .
Additionally , important advances in protein engineering have made possible the multisite incorporation of non-natural amino acids into proteins in vivo , which markedly expands the chemical versatility of genetically directed methods .
This research program capitalizes on the structural and sequence control of biosynthesis , combined with the novel chemical function of non-natural amino acids , to create new polymeric materials with exceptional architectural control .
Specific targets include the controlled presentation of groups such as saccharides , peptides , or electroactive moieties for applications in sensors , biomaterials , and nanotechnology .
The highly interdisciplinary nature of this research program will provide diverse opportunities for training in the research environment , and research concepts in this program will also be integrated into the materials science and engineering curriculum in courses such as polymer synthesis and advanced biomaterials .
Integration into undergraduate programs will include the implementation of biotechnology research and special topics discussion groups .
In addition to these educational contributions at the university level , a novel outreach program , The Science of Art , will be implemented at a regional high school .
The combination of these scientific and instructional programs will be the basis of innovative contributions to materials research and education .
CAREER Methodology for Statistical Computing in Massive Datasets Parallel Approaches to Cluster and MCMC EstimationDMS 0239734PI Ranjan MaitraThis project is aimed at developing practical methodology for statistical analysis and estimation in massively sized databases .
Because of automated data collection methods , there is nowa surfeit of severely multi-dimensional records .
Grouping them into homogeneous clusters to better understand them is a desirable goal in a variety of applications , yet classical statistical methods are computationally infeasible in many cases .
I propose to develop parallel methodology for this context .
Although the methodology and theory developed will be quite general and for potential use in applications ranging from business , medicine , the environment , software quality assessment , I will conduct the research in the context of three scientific collaborations .
The first pertains to theUS Environmental Protection Agency 's ( EPA ) self-reported Toxic Releases Inventory ( TRI ) databases , where profiling the different facilities in terms of their product , demographic and business information can improve the accuracy of records , as well as better characterize them vis-a-vis their emissions mix .
The second project is to assess the reliability of functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging ( fMRI ) scans , with a view to understanding the cognitive processes of the brain , as a first step to patient care and therapy .
The third application is in bioinformatics where the goal is to cluster microarray data and also to analyze two-dimensional proteomic gel images .
This will help in isolating genes and understanding their relationship with different disorders .
Clustering is in general a very difficult problem , with empirical solutions even for very moderately sized datasets .
I propose to develop multi-pass methodologies in several different scenarios .
I also propose multi-scale simulation approaches to estimation in a high-dimensional context .
One of the biggest challenges faced by simulation methods due to high dimensionality is the low mobility around the space to be traversed because of its vastness .
I propose to address this issue by connecting these high-dimensional spaces to lower-dimensional ones ( which are significantly smaller ) and by using these lower scales to traverse from one corner of the higher-dimensional space to another .
A final goal of this five-year plan is to investigate the development and estimation in more complex models for proteomic gel data .
Most of the plans proposed will be possible only with a parallel computing interface .
This is increasingly critical in a large number of scientific applications , and I propose to simultaneously provide statistics students with the necessary expertise by designing suitably tailored graduate and undergraduate classes .
The objective of this research is to perform exploratory research to assess the potential capability of wide-band radar in imaging FRP-confined concrete systems .
The proposed work will scientifically test a novel idea of focusing through data processing of multiple scattering microwave signals in distinguishing different damage levels under the FRP layers .
Capabilities including the optimization of resolution , penetration , and computing time will be tested .
Owing to the novelty of the study , we will bring together the expertise from the Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering , Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science , Research Laboratory of Electronics , and Lincoln Laboratory of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.Successful completion of this project would lead to an enormous scientific impact and lead us to the next phase of developing new imaging technologies for FRP-confined concrete systems .
Such technologies are urgently needed , and would revolutionize industrial practices and better help ensure public safety .
In view of the novelty and impacts of the subject , this proposal is considered suitable for an SGER grant .
Project Abstract This research aims to establish scientific principles and extend technologies for using Mixed Reality ( MR ) ?
visualization blending real and virtual elements ?
to support decision-making and control through the life cycle phases of constructed facility projects .
Challenges in establishing MR as a viable technology in the architecture , engineering , and construction ( A/E/C ) industry will be addressed through real-time virtual model generation , measurement of spatial cognition benefits , information visualization , and the definition of functionalities for individual and collaborative human-computer interactions .
This research is guided by the promise of Mixed Reality to provide intuitive and liberal interactions with design models and related project data in a more ubiquitous computing environment for the construction enterprise.Two particular research foci are 1. the creation of efficient and intuitive design and planning environments that utilize MR technology for enhancing design comprehension and supporting collaborations ; and 2. the creation of interface systems and interaction techniques that support the acquisition and communication of job site planning , execution , and inspection knowledge through direct access to graphically displayed , spatially referenced digital design data .
The core research is complemented by education activities encompassing both the creation of virtual visualization course modules and outreach and mentoring activities to expand the pipeline of African American students pursuing graduate degrees in civil engineering .
Recruiting and mentoring of students will be aided by a network of linkages with existing university outreach programs , an existing industry-university consortium , and parallel department-level initiatives to increase the numbers of women and students from Predominantly Undergraduate Institutions in engineering.The research plan aims to advance knowledge in the A/E/C industry with regard to human-machine interfaces and computer-mediated human-to-human interactions , particularly by addressing human factors .
This research will advance discovery in the construction discipline by applying a greater range of interdisciplinary expertise to meet challenges in creating , modifying , communicating , and comprehending constructed facility designs .
By further broadening the application of computing , the research serves to transform what is generally regarded as the predominantly low-tech nature of the A/E/C industry .
Enhancements can be achieved for both construction work processes and construction education .
The integrated education plan will develop a model for improving the network of relationships between minority and majority institutions .
0239482JohnsonThis one-year award supports a first-time sabbatical in Geneva , Bern , and Zurich , Switzerland to investigate the role of bacteria in decomposing pollutants in contaminated soils and waters .
The project involves William B. Johnson of the University of Utah and his graduate student and three Swiss researchers .
Their research focuses on observations of bacterial attachment-detachment dynamics in well-characterized systems .
Using green fluorescence protein methodology , they propose to characterize bacterial cell surface properties and apply this relationship to how bacteria attach and detach themselves through porous media .
The attachment-detachment behavior of selected bacterial strains on various surfaces will be examined under different environmental conditions ( water velocity , bacterial surface characteristics , substratum surface roughness and solution chemistry ) .
This international cooperative program brings together researchers with complementary expertise .
Professor Johnson will perform characterization of bacterial cell surface properties with Dr. Paolo Landini , a microbiologist at the Swiss Institute for Environment Technology .
Direct observation of bacterial attachment-detachment dynamics will be examined with Dr. Jaro Ricka of the University of Bern .
Interaction and adhesion force profiles will be developed with Dr. Michal Borkovec at the University of Geneva .
Understanding of attachment and detachment processes of bacteria in porous media have practical applications in environmental and pollution clean-up , and in particular , could lead to new methods to introduce pollution eating bacteria into contaminated sites .
PI Chongchun C. Zeng , University of VirginiaDMS-0239389 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -This project is concerned with various perturbation problems in the dynamics of some Hamiltonian or near Hamiltonian PDEs , such as nonlinear wave equations and nonlinear Schroedinger equations , etc .
The main issues include a ) finding correct formal asymptotics andtheir rigorous justification when singular perturbations are present ; b ) studying the dynamics in neighborhoods of special orbits representing typical qualitative properties , such as periodic , quasi-periodic , homoclinic/heteroclinic orbits .
Three types of interrelated problems involving perturbations will be investigated 1 ) Regular Hamiltonian perturbations of systems with homoclinic orbits to saddle-centers , e.g .
perturbations of sine-Gordon breathers .
2 ) Perturbations containing highest order derivatives .
With this type of perturbations to PDEs , the nature of the systems can be changed dramatically , e.g .
loss of finite speed propagation and/or disappearance of solutions backward in time .
Impact of both dissipative and conservative perturbations on the dynamics will be studied .
3 ) Hamiltonian motions with fast oscillations .
Averaging method and formal multi-scale analysis are applied in deriving the limiting wave or Schroedinger maps .
In addition to justifying the convergence on various time scales , the structural stability will be studied , which are in the form of normally elliptic type geometric singular perturbation problems.Many well-known evolutionary PDEs , as mathematical models , are approximations of real world dynamical systems .
In order to have better understanding of the original problems , we need to study not only these PDEs , but their perturbations as well , which may include factors like small viscosity or weak elasticity , etc .
On the other hand , while there are some special well-understood ones , it is usually rather difficult to study the qualitative properties and temporal asymptotic behavior of many evolutionary PDEs .
Rigorous and formal asymptotic analyses provide effective ways to study the dynamics of systems close to those special ones .
This proposal focuses on certain regular and singular perturbation problems related to waves , ferromagnetism , etc. , involving rapid oscillations , strong dissipation , strong dispersion etc .
In conjunction with this , it is also proposed to incorporate several aspects of this research into curriculum development .
This effort will include an application-minded reform of some current courses and the development of a new graduate PDE dynamics course presenting the dynamical system point of view for PDEs .
In addition , research and education will be woven together through the development and improvement of seminars and vertically integrated work groups .
The intellectual merit of this CAREER program is based on the design and realization of innovative sensors to improve measurement of the three-dimensional distribution of water vapor in the atmosphere .
Knowledge of the temporal and spatial distribution of water vapor is fundamental for short-range prediction of precipitation and severe weather .
The paucity of current observations of wind , temperature and humidity in pre-storm environments limits the improvement of forecast skill for these events .
This project will address these needs through the fabrication , validation and application of a four-sensor demonstration network of miniaturized water vapor profiling radiometers .
This novel sensor design is enabled by microwave monolithic integrated circuit ( MMIC ) technology made widely available by the wireless communications industry .
Compared to conventional waveguide-based designs , MMIC technology allows these sensors to be smaller , lighter and more robust .
New sensor technologies will enable larger networks of water vapor radiometers to perform higher-resolution observations .
The demonstration network will be used to validate remote water vapor measurements using both radiometers and SuomiNet GPS receivers , through comparison with in-situ observations , including radiosondes launched by the National Weather Service .
The automated pointing of the network 's sensors will enable direct comparison of GPS slant water vapor with radiometric profiles along the same slant paths.The educational portion of this project will introduce applications in atmospheric science to significant numbers of undergraduate electrical engineering students .
Novel methods of instruction will be introduced to encourage students to find the relationships between curriculum content and real-world applications and to participate in peer-to-peer learning .
Promising undergraduate students will be involved in design and fabrication of remote sensors in the laboratory.The broader impacts of the program include the availability of miniaturized atmospheric sensors to be deployed in larger networks , enhancing observation of the atmospheric state in order to improve weather prediction and climate monitoring , clearly providing benefits to society .
The research program will foster collaborations among universities , industry and government .
The research goals of this program lead naturally to collaboration with small U.S. businesses that produce radiometers for research .
Other broader impacts include the PI 's continuing mentoring of students from underrepresented groups as part of an NSF-sponsored summer program .
This research will use methods from game theory and information economics to examine two important aspects of the legal system and their implications for market and judicial efficiency .
One topic is the impact of confidential settlements on performance in markets for goods and services .
This research will address the market implications of this settlement option as well as alternative private and public policies to address what has come to be a significant concern that allowing confidential settlement protects and encourages bad behavior by agents in a variety of markets .
Alternatively , banning confidentiality may also compromise important values , such as personal privacy and the protection of intellectual property via trade secrecy ; without the ability to conclude confidential settlements , some important cases may never be brought , and fewer of those brought are likely to settle .
It is important to identify these tradeoffs and their implications for market performance in order that sensible public policy can be pursued ( by judges and legislators ) .
The second topic concerns how differences in information among litigants and judges affect the outcomes of individual cases and , ultimately , the evolution of the law .
The judicial process is inherently passive suits must be filed and appeals made in order for courts to be able to clarify rules and make/interpret law .
When law is made , or interpreted , by a sequence of courts ( as is true in our system ) , the effectiveness of correctives ( such as appeal ) may be attenuated by problems of insufficient resources or unwieldy organization.The study will address a number of important policy issues .
In the context of confidential settlements , does allowing confidential settlements adversely affect pricing and safety ?
Are there private responses to such inefficiencies that firms can make ( e.g. , can firms credibly , and profitably , commit to eschew confidential settlements ?
) , or is new public policy necessary ( such as banning confidentiality ) ?
Does current law , such as the doctrine of vicarious liability ( wherein , for example , corporations are liable for harms caused by employees ' job-related actions ) , ameliorate or exacerbate the use of confidential settlements to hide the bad behavior of economic agents ?
In the context of modeling decision-making by courts , how does information get aggregated in hierarchical court systems ?
What competitive forces determine which cases receive higher-court review ( essentially , how does the market for certiorari operate ? ) ?
To what degree will judicial inefficiency be systematic and persistent , or when will institutionalized correctives ( such as judicial dissent ) work to promote judicial efficiency ?
This research on information aggregation by courts contributes to understanding how courts function , how the law evolves , what may contribute to judicial inefficiency and what actions or policies may remedy such problems .
In this project , we propose an intensive program to develop new controller designmethodologies for a variety of inherently nonlinear systems , and to apply the findings tothe control problems of underactuated mechanical systems , mobile robots with flex link , and other practical systems with various uncertainties .
The systems under consideration donot have a controllable linearization that is a common requirement of existing controlschemes .
Therefore , most of the control problems for these systems are still open andindeed bring new challenges to the control engineering .
In this project , we concentrate onthe development of both theoretically sound and practically useful controller designschemes , which enable us to solve the difficult problems of global stabilization , adaptiveregulation , and output feedback control , for inherently nonlinear systems that can not beadequately controlled using the existing methods.Our primary approach relies on the adding a power integrator technique developed by theproposer and collaborators , which fully utilizes the nonlinearity of the systems toeffectively control the inherently nonlinear systems .
The recent research work based onthis tool has led to new solutions to a number of control problems for systems withuncontrollable linearization , and suggests that very promising advances can be achieved bythis research program.The educational component of this CAREER development plan aims at developing and reshapingcourses , introducing innovative teaching techniques , mentoring undergraduate and graduatestudents , setting up new laboratories , and creating research-oriented projects andhands-on experiments .
With all these efforts , we believe that the research program can beeffectively integrated into the academic curriculum of the University of Texas at SanAntonio .
Moreover , while exposing the students to state-of-the-art techniques , theeducation plan will also help bridge the gap between theoretical research and engineeringpractice , and therefore stimulate students ' interest in control engineering .
AST 0239881WittThis award will provide partial funding for the support of travel of young scientists , to make it possible for them to attend an international symposium on the Astrophysics of Dust , scheduled to convene in Estes Park , CO , in May , 2003.This is the first comprehensive symposium dealing with observational , theoretical , and laboratory-based aspects of cosmic dust since 1988 , with participants expected from numerous countries from five continents .
The coming decade will provide several new space- and ground-based observing facilities whose primary subject will be the study of emissions from and through dusty astrophysical environments .
The full and productive utilization of these facilities will require close collaboration between astronomers and scientists from related disciplines in physics , materials science and chemistry .
The Astrophysics of Dust symposium is intended to provide the forum for close interactions between members of these different groups .
It is of particular importance that young astronomers , just entering the field of dust-related astrophysics , have the ability to participate in this symposium and make the essential professional and personal connections with other colleagues in the field , which will enhance their future scientific contributions to this rapidly growing sub-discipline within astronomy .
*** 0239343HajimiriIt is widely accepted that high-speed communications will remain one of the major fields of studies in the foreseeable future .
Communications ( wireless or wireline ) are affected by many parameters , but it is essentially the limitations of the physical layer that determine its speed and flexibility .
While a large amount of effort has been dedicated to development of new substrates and techniques at the physical layer , high speed and low power communication systems and circuits are facing the physical limitations of the devices and substrates used .
This is particularly the case , in integrated systems and circuits , where non-dominant effects of the past are becoming dominant to haunt Moore 's law for high-speed circuits .
While the number of on-chip transistor increases , the inevitable limitations of the scaling process are creating limitations that can not be easily remedied .
These effects have completely changed the design space and have made it more difficult to substantially increase the bandwidth and the speed of such systems using the conventional design techniques .
These limitations are partly due to the levels of abstraction defined to facilitate the design process in the past , that have unfortunately lost their effectiveness in the light of the new constraints .
Still the silicon-based technologies are the most promising technology for the next generation of ultra-high speed communication systems operating at tens of gigaherz .
However , before this promise is realized in a practical system , a set of key research challenges need to be addressed .
In this proposal , the PI plans to investigate several of the system , circuit , device , and simulation challenges , as well as the general impact of the integration of communication systems.During the five year span of this proposal , he will continue to study many aspects of ultra high-speed silicon-based integrated circuits , emphasizing both their relevance to the practical integrated communication systems and circuits that will be developed in the near future , as well as their ability to develop new science and knowledge with implications beyond the initial problem .
The main topics to be studied include 1. noise processes in integrated communication systems , 2. distributed circuits for ultra high-speed wireless and wireline communications , 3. new transceiver architectures and concepts , 4. new device structures.The PI joined academia because of his strong belief that education is perhaps the only real long-term solution to the primary problems faced by human society .
Education is one of the primary human activities making learning and teaching two sides of the same coin .
Thus , as an educator , whether in the classroom , solving theoretical research problems with graduate students , or in the laboratory helping a student create her complicated setup , the PI has had and will have the opportunity to teach and learn , and to broaden the vision and horizons of , and create new possibilities for , both his students and himself .
His philosophy towards his career primarily as an educator is that every form of human interactions can and should be viewed as an opportunity to learn and educate .
He has been and will continue to be able to make a broader impact by training and preparing students for their future careers , so that they may take on leadership roles and contribute to society at large .
The primary reason for his joining Caltech is the unique opportunity to be a part of the strong link between its tradition in research and an extremely active and energetic student body .
Caltech 's excellence as a research institution , as well as its unwavering commitment to undergraduate education , make it an excellent place for such an endeavor .
Also , the vigor and strength of its undergraduate body combined with the Institute 's courage to challenge boundaries make it a perfect place to experiment with difficult and progressive approaches to teaching and education.The main objectives of his educational plan are 1. to continue teaching undergraduate and graduate level courses , emphasizing the fundamental concepts , encouraging creativity , and focusing on fundamental engineering trade-offs , 2. to continue curriculum development for all levels , trying to address as large an audience as possible , considering the needs of the department , institute , and society at large , 3. continue undergraduate and graduate advising by empowering students to realize their full capabilities .
The objective of this proposal is to provide opportunities for undergraduates to participate in research in cellular immunology at a small liberal arts college .
Students will be mentored by the Principal Investigator , a faculty member with dual training in immunology and science education , through the NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Science , Mathematics , Engineering and Technology Education Program ( PFSMETE ) .Independent research is a powerful learning experience for undergraduates .
Students are motivated to think creatively .
They are given the chance to develop skills in experimental design , data analysis and interpretation , communication of findings and ideas with others , and to feel the sheer excitement of discovery .
Undergraduate research can inspire students to pursue careers in science , and those who have the chance to work closely with a dedicated teacher and mentor may be more likely to include education as part of their future paths .
Thus , the benefit of such experience goes well beyond the individuals involved.The research proposed will focus on the immune system of fish , a model well ? suited for study in a small college setting .
The adaptive immune system of fish is particularly interesting because it has many of the same cell types and functions as the mouse and human immune systems , yet is simpler and largely unexplored .
Support will allow up to four students ( during the academic year as well as summers ) to work on characterizing the kinetics of zebrafish B cell ( antibody ? producing white blood cells ) responses to immunization with innocuous proteins .
For example , at various times after immunization with different proteins , students will determine the number and location of antibody producing cells in the main lymphoid organs , spleen and head kidney .
This work has the distinct advantage of being easily divided into well ? defined projects that will accommodate students of different levels of experience and knowledge .
Students will communicate their findings the yearly college ? wide research symposiums , as well as regional and/or national scientific meetings.Information on where and when B cell activation occurs during the primary immune response will provide a basis on which to begin to study secondary , memory cell mediated responses , those which are responsible for providing long ? term immunity to pathogens .
Learning how immune memory is developed and maintained in fish will be beneficial both to understanding the evolution of higher vertebrate immune systems , and to efforts in developing more effective vaccines for aquaculture .
Having undergraduates be empowered contributors to this field of knowledge will be invaluable .
The focus of this research is to develop new synthetic methodology for stereoselective [ 3+2 ] reactions based on Lewis-acid promoted ylide formation for the preparation of complex heterocycles .
The project will focus on carbonyl oxides and azomethine ylids produced by conrotatory 4-pi ring opening of epoxides and aziridines in the presence of Lewis acidic metals and enantiomerically pure ligand systems .
Applications will include the synthesis of non-racemic mixtures of diols and the synthesis of ( - ) -kainic acid .
The focus of the educational effort will be the introduction of team-based learning approaches to chemistry .
Dr. Johnson has delineated new approaches for the education of advanced organic students at U.N.C.With this CAREER award , the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research and educational efforts of Dr. Jeffrey S. Johnson of the Department of Chemistry at the University of North Carolina , Chapel Hill .
Professor Johnson will focus his research on the development of new methods for the construction of complex molecules that have potential for broader impact in the pharmaceutical industry .
This work focuses on obtaining only one enantiomer ( chiral isomer ) of an organic compound where the potential for the formation of two isomers exists .
These new methods could have important implications for the design of medicinally important compounds .
The educational activity of the award revolves around improved ways to teach organic chemistry to undergraduates .
This Small Business Innovation Research ( SBIR ) Phase II Project proposes to develop an innovative solution to the the problem of chlorinated solvent contamination in variably saturated , low permeability soils .
Prior Phase I work has demonstrated that 1 ) chitin is an effective electron donor for stimulating biodegradation of chlorinated solvents , 2 ) that chitin enhances bioavailability of the solvents , 3 ) that chitin can be incorporated into a proprietary hydraulic fracturing process for low permeability soils , and 4 ) that thedelivery method for chitin is effective in the field on a small scale .
The objectives of the Phase II Project are to evaluate biodegradation efficiency and longevity of chitin on a large scale .
Current approaches for low permeability soils are very capital-intensive and are seldom totally effective .
The proposed approach , in contrast , is low-cost and passive , and applicable in situ .
The method is particularly attractive since chitin is available in abundance as a byproduct from the shellfish industry .
The commercial applications of this project are in the area of soil bioremediation .
This Small Business Research ( SBIR ) Phase II project is concerned with the development and commercialization of electrochemically operated devices that will revolutionize the disinfectant industry by providing on-site , on-demand generation of extremely potent dual disinfectants .
Peroxyacids are well known disinfectants that remove even resistant microorganisms ( i.e .
spores ) by attacking S-S and S-H bonds on cell walls .
The conventional method of manufacturing peroxy acids involves mixing concentrated hydrogen peroxide , an organic acid , and a catalyst ( usually concentrated sulfuric acid ) , and involves the transportation and storage of hazardous chemicals .
During the Phase I , the feasibility of a novel approach for the generation of the dual disinfectant was amply demonstrated .
In this process , reactants for converting organic acids to dual disinfectants are generated within the device , avoiding problems associated with storage .
All the criteria of success specified have been successfully accomplished and a well-known industrial partner has shown a keen interest in commercializing the novel devices .
In Phase II , further optimization of the electrochemical devices will be followed by fabrication of prototypes of three devices for demonstrating their efficacy for a variety of disinfection applications .
There is a considerable need for devices that produce potent disinfectants that are biocidal against a broad spectrum of microbes including spores and viruses .
These devices that produce potent disinfectants on-demand have commercial potential in domestic health care and food service establishments as well as in infection control applications in hospitals and nursing homes .
It is estimated that revenues of the entire cleaning/sanitizing industry will be $ 31 billion in 2007 .
Project summaryCoupling physical and chemical weathering mechanisms and rates for upland landscapesErosion laws direct our study of Earth surface processes and form the basis of landscape evolution modeling , but are rarely based on field data .
Soil-covered upland landscapes comprise a critical part of the habitable world .
Our understanding of how they change as a function of different climatic , tectonic , and geologic regimes is important across a wide range of disciplines .
It has been recognized for over a hundred years that the thickness of soil cover helps determine the rate at which bedrock is converted to soil , and therefore what the upper limit might be to surficial erosion rates .
Empirical confirmation of the relationship between soil thickness and soil production is recent , however , and appears to be without direct physical explanation of the variation of soil production across the landscape .
Similarly , there are few field-based data that quantify the processes of soil transport , nor are there clear empirical linkages between the extent of chemical weathering of bedrock and the mechanical soil production from the same bedrock.This project will ( 1 ) quantify the nature and extent of chemical weathering on landscapes where the soil production function is known , ( 2 ) quantify soil production rates and processes across portions of the landscape not examined previously , and ( 3 ) determine the processes of sediment transport across the two very different landscapes examined with this study .
Specifically , we will use in situ produced cosmogenic nuclides ( 10Be and 26Al ) to determine soil production and catchment-averaged erosion rates , the Chemical Index of Alteration and elemental depletion curves to determine the extent of chemical weathering , and short-lived fallout nuclides ( 7Be , 210Pb , 241Am and 137Cs ) to help determine the sediment transport processes .
These separate methodologies will be used to test two fundamental hypotheses ( I ) the physical erosion rate equals soil production and varies systematically with climatic , geologic , and tectonic settings ; and , ( II ) the rate of soil production from bedrock beneath an active soil layer varies systematically with the degree of chemical weathering of the bedrock .
0239138CostaThe goals of this CAREER proposal are ( 1 ) to develop the atomic force microscope as a nano-tool for advancing the field of cell biomechanics and ( 2 ) to create an integrated hands-on educational program in cellular biomechanics in conjunction with these research efforts .
Biological tissues are comprised of cells , and the mechanical properties of these cells directly impact on their fundamental functions including cell migration , proliferation , viability , and remodeling of the extracellular matrix in response to altered loading conditions .
From a basic science standpoint , knowledge of cell mechanical properties is required to elucidate the mechanisms of cell function .
Moreover , certain forms of heart disease , cancer and arthritis have been associated with altered mechanical properties of the cells of those tissues .
Thus , characterizing cellular mechanical properties may enhance the ability to screen for disease and evaluate potential gene therapies and other treatments .
Atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) is a recently developed technology that has rapidly gained popularity for measuring cell mechanics .
AFM has advantages over alternative techniques including relative ease of use , ability to combine imaging and indentation capabilities , and it is commercially available .
However , in contrast to the extensive engineering analysis of e.g .
micropipette experiments , relatively little has been done to analyze the AFM experiment .
The standard accepted AFM analysis assumes the cell behaves like a simple piece of rubber .
Most biological tissues , on the other hand , exhibit complex nonlinear elastic and viscous properties that often vary regionally and have preferred axes of symmetry .
These characteristics may extend to the cellular level as well .
Therefore , this CAREER application proposes the most sophisticated analysis and validation of the AFM indentation problem to date .
Finite elements will be used to simulate the full-scale 3-D AFM indentation experiment , incorporating detailed cell topography and probe geometry .
Alternative constitutive models relating stress and strain within the cell , including effects of viscoelasticity , anisotropy , nonlinearity , and heterogeneity of material properties , will also be evaluated .
In addition , a number of technological enhancements are proposed to optimize the AFM as a nano-tool for cell mechanics applications .
The insights gained will be used to guide cell indentation experiments , to improve data analysis , and to help realize the tremendous potential of this powerful technique.Connected with the research activity , a new course module in Biomechanics of Cells is proposed in the Department of Biomedical Engineering at Columbia University .
The goal is to expose students to biomedical applications of nanotechnology as applied to the field of cell mechanics .
Specifically , students in this graduate / advanced undergraduate course will use the AFM to gain hands-on experience interacting with materials at the cellular and sub-cellular scale .
New advances in the research program will be integrated into the course and will also be incorporated into an outreach Summer High School Program .
In addition , a multimedia web-based training tool will be developed and published on the National Science Digital Library so that it is always available educators and researchers interested in mechanical testing of cells and other biological materials using AFM .
The website will include theoretical foundations , detailed methods , and practical tips for success enhanced by multi-media content .
Through these combined research and educational activities , the PI aims to further the science of nano-scale biomechanics and stimulate interest in this new and exciting field .
The possibility of exploiting the spin of electrons ( or holes ) in electronic devices has led to the emergence of the new field of spintronics .
The efficiency of spintronics devices is strongly dependent on the degree of the spin polarization in a ferromagnet .
In particular , half-metals , which are 100 % spin-polarized , are of fundamental importance for the next-generation of electronic devices .
The experimental confirmation of the existence of such highly spin-polarized materials systems is vital to spintronics .
The proposed research focuses on developing a fundamental understanding of the basics of spin transport in highly spin-polarized materials and on the ongoing search for novel highly spin-polarized materials.We propose a cohesive research program to further develop and expand Point Contact Andreev Reflection ( PCAR ) Spectroscopy and to apply it to the spin polarization measurements in dilute magnetic semiconductors and metal alloys .
In addition , we propose to explore the viability of a new nonvolatile ferromagnet-superconductor device based on Andreev reflection .
The proposal also includes an initial exploratory study of spatially resolved spin polarization measurements ( Spin Mapping ) with potential in situ capabilities.The PI has recently observed for the first time Andreev reflection in the point contact geometry in a non-magnetic semiconductor , and has obtained some preliminary results in magnetic semiconductors .
These results strongly indicate that the PCAR technique can become a viable measurement technique for dilute magnetic semiconductors , which is crucial for the future development of this field .
In addition to the spin polarization measurements , transport , magnetic , chemical , and structural analysis will be performed to study in detail the following materials systems 1 ) Dilute magnetic and non-magnetic semiconductors Non-magnetic semiconductors ( e.g. , BeGaAs ) .
Magnetic semiconductors GaMnSb , GaMnAs , InMnSb , and MnAs.2 ) Other theoretically predicted half-metals double perovskites ( Sr2FeMoO6 , ) and CoxFe1-xS2.As part of the broader impact of his research proposal the PI is planning to promote collaboration with the local industry ( especially Delphi Automotive ) and with HYPRES ( on ferromagnet/superconductor nonvolatile device ) .
He is also collaborating with Oak Ridge National Laboratory , where the PI is one of the University Champions of the new Nanophase Materials Science Center .
The spatially resolved spin polarization measurements ( Spin Mapping ) and will be investigated in partnership with the Center.The PI is actively involved in a comprehensive program to broaden participation of minorities in physics .
He gives public lectures to high school students to explain what is involved in being a physicist and to try to eliminate a psychological barrier that often prevents many minority students and women from becoming a scientist .
He is advising the Detroit Science Center on the content and scientific quality of their physics-related exhibits .
The PI 's two major educational goals , integrated with his research , are1 ) Develop a pilot program aimed at introducing a Senior Research Project at WSU as a required part of the curriculum.2 ) Develop a new graduate level course Magnetism , Magnetic Devices and Nanotechnology .
This course will introduce the basic concepts in magnetism , GMR and TMR devices and sensors , novel magnetic materials , spin transport and spin polarization measurements , and modern nanofabrication techniques .
This CAREER award to Professor Michael Van Stipdonk of Wichita State University is supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division .
In this project , mass spectrometry will be further developed and refined for identification of peptides and proteins , a crucial step in efforts to understand metabolic pathways , cellular signaling , and the biochemistry of disease .
The sequence of amino acids , the order in which they are linked together , ultimately identifies a peptide or protein .
Before mass spectrometry can be used for high-throughput and high-accuracy sequencing directly ( i.e .
without resorting to library or database searches ) , a clear understanding of the rules that govern peptide and protein dissociation in the gas-phase is required .
The project includes a comprehensive investigation of factors that guide dissociation reactions , including the importance of cation choice ( proton or metal ion ) , peptide sequence , tautomerization , cyclization and intramolecular proton transfer .
The work will lead to an optimized and validated mass spectrometry approach to peptide/protein identification that can be applied to proteome analysis , biochemistry and molecular biology.The project has , and will continue to include undergraduate students as integral participants in research .
From their experiences , new experiments for the determination of amino acid sequence in peptides will be condensed and transformed into novel educational exercises .
With regard to the K-12 system , a new program will be developed to address the important issue of science teacher preparation and retention .
The PI and several representatives of area public and private high schools envision a comprehensive resource to support science teachers , including the training of new teachers through the Wichita State University Alternative Certification program .
In particular , lesson plans , teaching strategies , and exercises in critical thinking will be developed and shared among many new teachers ; already , more than 90 teachers have expressed interest in the program .
Opportunities will also be extended to high school teachers to spend summer months conducting research at Wichita State University , strengthening their mastery of chemistry content knowledge , and better preparing them to translate and transfer the excitement and relevance of science to their students .
Abstract For reasons not entirely understood , combustion chambers that favor high efficiencies and low emissions often exhibit combustion instabilities .
These instabilities arise due to a regenerative coupling between chamber acoustics and thermal fluctuations .
Some instabilities appear as limit cycle oscillations in the flow variables of basic propulsion and power generation systems .
Examples include rocket motors , ramjet engines , gas turbines , afterburners , and large industrial combustors .
The research phase of this project aims at developing a comprehensive stability algorithm that can be used as a diagnostic tool in the developmental stages of large combustors .
The newly developed algorithm will be based on the latest technological advances that suggest incorporating the effects of acoustical , thermal and vortical waves from the ground up .
The new representation of chamber acoustics will permit estimating the growth or decay of the system energy with most rotational flow effects accounted for .
In the process , a generalized mean-flow description that mimics realistic chamber conditions will be employed .
This representation is expected to enhance the accuracy of both linear and nonlinear stability equations used in the literature .
The anticipated improvements in acoustic energy gains are also hoped to explain experimental findings that elude the present stability assessment methodology .
As a windfall , it is projected that the origins of several injection-driven instabilities observed in solid , liquid and hybrid rocket motors will be illuminated .
The educational phase of this career development plan describes a sequence of activities to be undertaken during the funding period .
These include incentives for undergraduate curriculum development , initiatives for promoting research opportunities for both graduates and undergraduates , initiatives for encouraging interdisciplinary interactions , course enhancement methodologies , and recruitment of underrepresented groups .
The goal of this Small Business Innovation Research ( SBIR ) Phase II project is to bring radically new technology to the machine translation marketplace .
While current systems are rule-based and difficult to extend , this company employs a statistical system that learns to translate by automatically analyzing large collections of previously translated material .
This technology already outperforms rule-based systems , and it easily adapts to specific domains of interest , such as technical documentation generated by multinational corporations .
The company has licensed ( and co-developed ) key software engines from the founders ' research team at USC/ISI , a world leader in machine translation .
In this project , they will extend their statistical engine in three ways , driven by customer needs -- they propose to build ( 1 ) a parallel , cluster-based training system for handling large text volumes ( 2 ) new capabilities for translating numbers , dates , personal names , locations , etc .
( named entities ) , and ( 3 ) rapid customization tools that will assist with customized translation engines for specific customer domain requirements.There has been substantial client/funding interest from intelligence agencies , corporate users , and angel and venture investment groups .
Over the next year , the plan is to capitalize on this interest by developing several clients and shipping the first products .
SES- 0239995 Lisa Keister Ohio State University Research Foundation This research investigates the effect of nonstandard work on worker asset accumulation .
Researchers have documented extreme inequalities in asset ownership , but the processes that create these inequalities are not well understood .
One potentially important contributing factor that has attracted little attention is a rise in nonstandard work .
Part-time , temporary , and contract work can be flexible and may allow workers to evaluate a potential job before accepting a permanent position .
Yet compensation and benefits can be relatively low for many nonstandard workers , altering the saving patterns of these workers .
This project explores ( 1 ) whether nonstandard workers accumulate assets differently than traditional workers , ( 2 ) whether demographic traits , work histories , and workplace traits of nonstandard workers affect their patterns of asset accumulation , and ( 3 ) the implications of these patterns for aggregate-level wealth inequality and related public policies .
The research will test numerous hypotheses drawn from social and economic theory to understand the relationship between nonstandard work and asset ownership .
A unique contribution of this study is an effort to understand the relationship between nonstandard jobs and assets during specific working years , as a trajectory or path over time , and projected at retirement .
The PI will synthesize data from three survey data sets and use simulation modeling to exploit these data , to investigate distributional outcomes , and to examine policy implications .
Multiple outcomes will be used to explore these relations , including asset ownership , pension ownership , accumulation trajectories over time , projected well being during retirement , and aggregate-level wealth inequality .
The study holds promise for evaluating theories about inequality and well being , for expanding understanding of the consequences of nonstandard work , and for anticipating the need for new policies designed to protect nonstandard workers during retirement .
This Small Business Innovation Phase II Project will develop information theoretic methods to separate fetal electrocardiogram ( FECG ) signals from the noisy electrical environment of the maternal abdomen based on statistical properties of the mixtures ( blind source separation ) .
The separation is done using a recently introduced algorithm ( Mermaid ) that is computationally and data efficient .
Phase I research showed that Mermaid is a marked improvement over prior methods of FECG separation .
The project will develop the technology for a comprehensive fetal and maternal monitor including fetal heart rate , FECG , and maternal Electrohysterogram ( EHG , which measures contraction information ) in a very compact device .
The project includes clinical studies designed to provide the information necessary to create and validate NeuroDimension 's system and also to illustrate its effectiveness .
Potential markets include hospital-based fetal monitoring , home/physician 's office fetal monitoring and stress tests , and use as a research tool .
The monitor not only will be less expensive than current monitors , but also will provide additional information that can dramatically improve patient care and reduce costs by avoiding unnecessary procedures .
Krzysztof Szalewicz of the University of Delaware is supported by the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to develop and apply symmetry-adapted perturbation theory ( SAPT ) to investigations of intermolecular interactions in molecular clusters and the condensed phase .
Part of the effort will be devoted to further extensions of SAPT that will improve convergence , treat open-shell systems , handle species of increased size , and provide for a physical decomposition of interaction energies into electrostatic , exchange , induction , and dispersion contributions .
Applications include the structures and thermodynamic properties of van der Waals complexes , condensed phases of carbon dioxide , and mixtures of water and methane.This project will enhance understanding of phenomena dependent on intermolecular interactions such as properties of clusters , liquids , molecular solid phases , and many biochemical processes .
This activity may contribute to new pressure and temperature standards , help in developments of green chemistry , aid explorations of energy resources , and provide data for constructing models of the atmosphere .
The focus of this research is to functionalize nanoparticles , eliminate aggregation of the resulting particles , segregate and assemble the particles in polymer materials , and explore the chemistry of the functionalized particles at liquid-liquid interfaces .
The goal of the project is to achieve precise interfacial control of the nanoparticles within polymer matrices by the simultaneous use of tri-n-octyl phosphine oxide ( TOPO ) to control solubility , and ruthenium-based Grubb 's catalyst sites to initiate polymerization in a spacially segregated manner .
A second aspect of the proposed work involves orienting the nanoparticles along an aqueous-organic phase boundary .
Unique educational opportunities for students will be pursued in collaboration with scientists from Kodak .
With this CAREER award , the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research and educational efforts of Dr. Todd Emrick of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Massachusetts , Amherst .
Professor Emrick will focus his research on the development of new materials containing nanoparticles oriented along specific planes within the materials .
This could have important ramifications in the development of new types of optical and electrical devices .
The educational activities of the award will include interactions of his students with scientists at Kodak Park in Rochester , New York .
This Faculty Early Career Development ( CAREER ) project will focus on microwave spectroscopies of novel molecule based materials .
Specific projects include magnetic resonance studies of interlayer coherence in quasi-two-dimensional organic metals ; Josephson plasma resonance investigations of interlayer phase coherence in nodal superconductors ; spectroscopy of the field-induced-superconducting state in lamda- ( BETS ) ( 2 ) Fe ( 1-x ) Ga ( x ) Cl ( 4 ) ; and electron paramagnetic resonance investigations of exchange coupled systems of single molecule magnets .
Instrument development will continue to play a major role in the growth of the PI 's research activities , extending various novel magnetic resonance spectroscopic techniques well into the sub-millimeter-wave regime .
Unique high-frequency instrumentation can be expected to have important uses beyond the scope of the investigations described in this proposal , e.g .
for high-resolution high-frequency EPR , with applications in chemistry and biology .
The educational component of the project is aimed at addressing the disconnection between the general public and their appreciation of forefront materials research .
Activities include research experiences and outreach activities involving undergraduates , high school students and teachers ; courses in the communication of science ; the development of an interdisciplinary graduate level materials research seminar ; and efforts to convey the excitement of materials research into freshman physics courses.Research into molecule based materials has made enormous strides in recent years , with the discoveries of all organic magnets and superconductors , synthetic electronic materials , and single-molecule nano-devices .
While there is huge promise in terms of potential applications , much remains to be learned about the fundamental characteristics of these materials .
This Faculty Early Career Development ( CAREER ) project aims to explore many of these novel material characteristics using electron magnetic resonance ( EMR ) spectroscopy .
EMR enables us to probe the dynamics of electrons in solids , as well as the nature of their interactions with the environment in which they exist .
In doing so , we hope to address several key questions such as why do some newly discovered materials display superconductivity only at high magnetic fields , while the superconductivity in almost all other known superconductors is destroyed by a magnetic field ; and what happens to magnetic memories when they are reduced to the ( nanometer ) dimensions at which quantum effects begin to play a role ?
Answers to these questions will impact society in terms of future technologies .
In parallel with these investigations , outreach and instruction will address the obvious disconnection between the general public and their appreciation of forefront materials research .
Efforts will focus on students at all levels , as well as high school teachers .
Strategies include participation in interdisciplinary research projects , and courses aimed at developing effective scientific communicative skills .
This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II Project will develop prototype software to provide optimal real time purchase and repair replenishment , and allocation of service spare parts used to provide after-sales support to mission-critical products .
It will design , develop and test advanced optimization algorithms to ensure that the right part is ordered from the right source in the right quantity at the right time and then allocated to the right location .
In Phase III these engines will be incorporated in MCA Solutions planned commercial enterprise software product Replenishment and Allocation Optimizer ( RAO ) and complement MCA Solutions current product Service Parts Optimizer ( SPO ) .
The use of this tool will result in higher availability of service parts , increase products uptime and lower expense in service parts inventory .
The target industries for this solution will be Defense , Aerospace , and manufacturers of Automotive , Computer , Telecommunications and Hi-Tech equipment .
RAO will be the first commercial software product to support near real time optimization of inventory management in service supply chains .
The requirement allocation optimizer software market is underdeveloped .
The size of this opportunity is significant .
Over 1,100 companies in the United States generate sales higher than $ 250 M/year in the original equipment manufacturer segment .
Combined sales in this sector are $ 3.3 trillion with total inventory investment in service parts of about $ 250 Billion .
Service parts inventory accounts for about 5 to 10 % of product sales for an OEM .
The technology has the potential to reduce these investments by 20 % to 40 which in turn may pass some of the reductions to the customers .
This CAREER award to Professor Christine Keating of Pennsylvania State University is supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division and by Cellular Systems in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences .
In this project , the properties of aqueous two-phase systems will be studies as contained within giant unilamellar vesicles .
Questions to be addressed include the partitioning of proteins and other macromolecules between the two phases , and how this partitioning is affected by encapsulation within the vesicle .
The partitioning could either follow Michaelis-Menton or may show a sigmoidal , i.e. , switchlike response curve , with the latter giving access to unique vesicle properties .
One property to be examined is vesicle locomotion based on the reversible polymerization of cytoskeletal proteins within these synthetic cells with the driving force provided by a temperature and/or chemical gradient .
The overall goal of the project is elucidation of the functional architectures used by cells , a knowledge which can then be applied to abiotic nanostructures.A comprehensive education and outreach plan is described , including outreach to high school students through a high school biology teacher .
High school teachers have already worked in the PI 's lab during summer months and a new teacher is to be supported for one summer with this award .
These teachers have worked with state-of-the-art instrumentation and have been key in development of new experiments with biosensors and cell structure appropriate for the high school laboratory .
In addition , the PI will develop a new graduate-level course on biorecognition .
This proposal outlines a set of research and educational endeavors as part of the PI 's career development plan to establish a Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning Laboratory at Rowan University .
The research will address the problem of incremental learning of new in-formation without losing previously acquired knowledge , using an ensemble of classifiers approach .
It will also addresses related issues that can benefit from an ensemble approach , such as estimating classification confidence and learning in non-stationary environments.The research will be tightly integrated into a variety of traditional and nontraditional educational activities .
Traditional activities include developing undergraduate and graduate courses , laboratory exercises and seminars , while nontraditional activities include forming integrated research and learning communities ( IRLCs ) to introduce research based education to undergraduate curriculum .
These communities will consist of students of all classifications , freshman through graduate ( vertical integration ) with a conscious effort of integrating diverse gender , ethnic , and racial backgrounds ( horizontal integration ) .
Communities will be working on different aspects of the project , with individual members responsible of tasks that are commensurate with their intellectual and academic skills .
These activities will develop research , analytical thinking , problem solving , team building and communication skills of the community members , while providing maximum multidisciplinary research exposure to both undergraduate and graduate students .
This CAREER project addresses nanoelectronics research and introduces this topic at the gradu-ate level , and also to undergraduate non-science majors .
The research focuses on carbon-nanotube/superconductor materials , and will explore nanotube/superconductor junctions .
Spe-cific goals are 1 ) Achieving control of superconductor/nanotube interfaces , both in the high-transparency and low-transparency contact regime , by using liquid metals and metals with low melting point .
2 ) Studying the superconducting proximity effect , DC and AC Josephson effect , and quantum entanglement in single and multiple junctions .
Microfluidic MEMS techniques will be used to attach liquid metals and metals with low melting point to nanotubes .
Properties of interfaces will be studied by varying the temperature through the liquid , solid and superconducting transitions .
Nanotube devices will also be made using aluminum or niobium-aluminum bilayers as superconducting electrodes .
Niobium-aluminum bilayers will also be used to form low-transparency interfaces by oxidizing the aluminum to form a tunnel barrier for the study of Cooper pair tunneling in nanotubes .
The research has potential impact beyond the interplay of nanotubes and superconductivity .
Control of the contact interface is essential for future mass-production of nanotube devices to assure reliability and to keep heating as low as possible .
De-velopment of the integration of nanotubes with microfluidic MEMS techniques will also enhance the possibility to use nanotubes as biological and chemical sensors .
% % % The project addresses fundamental materials science research issues having technological rele-vance .
The research program provides excellent opportunities for hands-on experience in the use of sophisticated scientific equipment .
Additionally , research will be brought into the classrooms of non-science majors by introducing nanotechnology in a course on How Things Work .
An im-portant feature of the project is the strong emphasis on education , and the integration of research and education .
*** COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH Sensory Ecology of an Animal Communication Network ( IBN 0239164/0238854 ) George W. Uetz , J. Andrew Roberts , University of Cincinnati David L. Clark , Alma CollegeAnimal communication is often multi-modal , as production and detection of signals may involve several sensory modes .
Conspicuous , multi-modal signals may be intercepted by receivers that are intended ( potential mates ) or unintended ( eavesdropping competitors and predators ) and the evolution of signaling behavior is subject to trade-offs between conflicting selection pressures .
This research will use field observation , environmental measurement and laboratory experimentation to examine how eavesdropping competitors and predators intercept and exploit the courtship signals of spiders .
Studies will examine how visual and vibratory signals of male wolf spiders are influenced by the complex forest floor environment and transmitted within a communication network of potential receivers .
The active space , or transmission range of multi-modal signals will be measured in the field with computer-assisted illuminance spectrophotometry and laser doppler vibration recording .
Sensory cue isolation and video/audio playback experiments will determine how multiple modes of communication influence signal detection by other spiders , as well as vertebrate and invertebrate predators .
Taken together , results of field and laboratory studies will allow a better understanding of animal communication in a complex environment .
Collaboration between researchers from a university and a liberal arts college will promote teaching , training and learning through post-doctoral training , involvement of undergraduate students from both institutions in the research , and a research and education partnership with the environmental education center where field research is done .
The focus of this research is on the design and synthesis of universal polymer backbones for use in simultaneous multi-recognition of functional groups .
The central theme is to produce a polymer backbone that can be modified as required by the attachment of binding functionalities of interest .
Monomers bearing various transition metals and chelating groups , as well as functional groups bearing hydrogen bond donor and acceptors with various patterns will be polymerized to produce polymers capable of subsequent modification .
In terms of broader impact , the modified polymers are expected to be useful for a wide range of biological , optical and electronic applications .
The focus of the educational effort will be the development and introduction of a new campus-wide interdisciplinary laboratory course for undergraduates .
With this CAREER award , the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research and educational efforts of Dr. Marcus M. Weck in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the Georgia Institute of Technology .
Professor Weck will focus his research on the production of polymers capable of modification to suit various purposes in biology , optics or electronics .
The educational component of the award will center on the development of a new laboratory course designed to introduce college students from many different disciplines to the uses of polymers , and a workshop to introduce polymer chemistry to faculty at undergraduate institutions .
The objective of this CAREER project is to establish a significant advancement in biomolecular nanoelectronics by theoretical modeling and interfacing liquid-state biopolymers to solid-state nanoelectronic devices .
The scientific component of this project aimed on the theoretical modeling of dielectric behavior of biopolymers and elucidating experimentally interactions of DNA-counterion , RNA-DNA , protein-protein , and actin filament-counterion in the cavity between two nanogap electrodes .
The technological components of this project focus on the precise control of sub10 nm nanogap electrode for biosensors , development of sensitive label free bioassays , and a robust batch fabrication method of integrated nanogap electrode arrays with nanofluidic networks .
The educational goal of this project is to effectively integrate research into educational activities and the training of both undergraduate and graduate students in interdisciplinary studies Special educational outreach program will be accomplished through summer research training camp to educate women and under-represented students in junior and senior high school .
Overall educational goal is to train students how to carry out their research with sound theory and hand on laboratory skill for their advanced careers in quantitative biological sciences or biophysical engineering .
The main aims of this project are in three directions .
( a ) To advance existing approaches and to develop new methods for the rigorous asymptotic solution of integrable nonlinear wave equations , primarily the nonlinear Schroedinger equation , in the small dispersion limit ; also to understand how the structure of the solution , critically affected by the modulational instability , depends on the degree of smoothness of the initial data .
( b ) To develop methods within the theory of integrable and near-integrable wave equations to deal with wave reflection from boundaries and time dependent forcing .
( c ) To develop numerical and analytical tools for the study of electromagnetic resonant fields and surface wave phenomena in periodic and random photonic crystal slabs with as well as without the presence of nonlinearity .
INTEGRABLE WAVE PROPAGATION is often a very good approximation to physical wave propagation in real materials ( e.g .
the nonlinear Schroedinger equation and its perturbations model transmission of light in fiber optics ) , and related mathematical aspects like the modulational instability play a crucial role in the optimal design of communications systems .
PHOTONIC CRYSTALS , first developed in the eighties , allow light to be trapped in or guided through regions of dimensions comparable to its wavelength .
They are already in use in microwave antennas , low threshold lasers and other devices .
In most of their current applications they function as linear devices .
We investigate nonlinear behavior and therefore pay particular attention to resonant behavior , which generates large fields for which the nonlinearity of the medium plays a central role .
SaalEAR-0207136 The goals of this study are to provide additional constraints to improve our knowledge of the Galapagos plume and its interaction with the Galapagos Spreading Center .
Two scientific issues pertaining to the geological evolution of the Galapagos will be addressed as part of this study .
Firstly , in order to understand which processes are responsible for the geochemical variations of the Galapagos lavas and which current model is most suited to explain them , we propose a study that combines oxygen and radiogenic isotope analyses with major and trace elements compositions on the same sample set .
Secondly , we propose to develop a geodynamic picture of the upwelling velocities and melting of the mantle beneath the Galapagos archipelago .
Traditionally , geodynamic pictures of mantle upwelling and melting have been obtained through detailed geophysical studies .
In the last 15 to 20 years , the study of U-series ( 238U-230Th , 230Th-226Ra , 235U-231Pa ) has allowed scientists to image the mantle upwelling and melting using a geochemical tool .
In contrast to other radiogenic isotope systems , the short half lives of the U-series will allow us to get a first look at the present-day mantle composition , the extent of melting represented by a suit of lavas and estimate the mantle upwelling at different points in the archipelago .
The combination of U-series , oxygen and other radiogenic isotopes with major and trace elements contents measured in the same samples combined with ongoing geophysical studies , will provide our best opportunity to obtain a reliable geodynamic image of the Galapagos plume and the surrounding asthenosphere .
Since very little research has examined the impact on surveys of the exploding growth of wireless communication devices , this study will assess the extent to which these devices are likely to change telephone surveys .
This issue will be addressed by comparing the results of two national surveys , one using the usual list-assisted RDD sample and the other employing a sample of mobile telephone numbers .
The questionnaire , which will be identical in both surveys , will include substantive items on important policy issues as well as inquiries about mobile telephone ownership and use .
The analyses will search for significant differences between surveys along four dimensions-coverage , nonresponse , data quality , and relationships among variables .
Methodological factors , such as the number of attempts , the percentage of sample numbers whose status as working or nonworking is indeterminate , and the effects of caller-id , will also be compared .
The basic hypothesis underlying all analyses is that there are major differences between the two modes along each dimension.Given that wireless communication devices will only become more widely used and more sophisticated in the very near future , it is necessary to determine how they might enrich and supplement the survey process .
This research will provide initial evidence .
Contact through mobile telephones promises to make hard-to-reach respondents more accessible and to give voice to groups either poorly represented or not represented at all in current surveys .
By gauging the reactions of respondents to survey contacts via a cellular telephone , the project also will provide practical guidance on incorporating wireless devices into the survey process .
Since methodologists now predict that future surveys will be multi-modal , mixing present and future wireless communication devices with fixed line telephones and the web , this study will describe both the opportunities and the pitfalls involved .
The end result will be an expanded definition of surveys and better and more valid data upon which to base public policy .
This research is supported by the Methodology , Measurement , and Statistics Program and a consortium of federal statistical agencies under the Research on Survey and Statistical Methodology Funding Opportunity .
This award provides partial support for a mini-symposium June 3-5 , 2002 to commemorate the numerous contributions of Dr. Egon Balas on the occasion of his 80th birthday .
Dr. Balas is a long time NSF grantee in the Operations Research program and one of the World 's leading contributors to the field of combinatorial optimization .
He has made many fundamental advances and has won most of the prestigious awards for distinguished achievement in mathematical programming and operations research .
The meeting will include talks at Dr. Balas ' Carnegie-Mellon University from numerous distinguished speakers in the area of combinatorial optimization .
NSF funding will help support participation by doctoral and postdoctoral students , and selected invited speakers .
EIA 0207338 Roberts , FredRutgers UniversityTITLE Satellite Reconnect ProjectThis Satellite Reconnect Project is designed to reconnect to the computer science and mathematics research enterprise , two-year and four-year college faculty who have not had opportunities to keep up with new research developments .
It aims to reinvigorate their careers and enhance their teaching by exposing them to current research topics in computer science and related mathematics that are relevant to the undergraduate classroom .
This is being accomplished initially through a series of summer conferences at DIMACS , the Center for Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science , at Rutgers University .
As part of the conferences , participants prepare written classroom materials based on current research topics and have the opportunity to publish them in the DIMACS Educational Modules Series .
Concurrently , the basic program conference structure is being replicated at six selected satellite locations around the country , generally with different research topics , but under DIMACS guidance and leadership .
Through this mechanism , the project aims to establish a community of individuals and institutions with expertise in and commitment to this type of Reconnect project and concept .
The satellite activities are supplemented with an effort to disseminate the model to the wider community so that this type of program can be copied at numerous other locations around the country .
The PI 's propose to employ recent advancements in geochronometric techniques to refine their understanding and models of the Proterozoic geology of the southern Lake Superior region .
Their objectives are two-fold 1 ) to use U-Pb monazite geochronometry ( both ion probe and EMP ) to document and directly date Penokean and subsequent metamorphic events ( i.e. , Yavapai , Mazatzal and Wolf River metamorphism ) in an attempt to link these episodes to continued subduction after the Penokean orogeny ; and 2 ) to use Ar-Ar laser microprobe grain-scale age mapping to evaluate the influence of multiple crustal events on the regional thermal record .
Their results will be used ultimately to establish the Proterozoic geology of this historical region in the context of a long-lived convergent orogen model ( Karlstrom et al. , 2001 ) .
Metamorphic geochronometry .
Results of recent NSF-supported research ( Holm and VanSchmus ) on the origin of post-Penokean granites show that magmatism long thought to be solely1760 Ma , actually occurred in three separate , generally southeastward-migrating pulses at 1800,1775 , and 1750 Ma .
Van Schmus , Holm and their co-authors have postulated that thesemagmatic pulses could correlate with northward-directed subduction associated with southwardgrowth of the continent .
In one possible scenario , geon 17 Yavapai-age slab rollback of anorthward subducting oceanic plate caused continental arc magmatism to step generallysoutheastward between 1800 and 1750 Ma .
As the slab steepened , it would have disengagedfrom the overlying , overthickened crust .
The reduced compressional stresses and increasedthermal input allowed for extensional collapse of the orogen and subsequent but short-livedcrustal stabilization .
The PI 's propose to carry out a detailed metamorphic study to test the hypothesis that widespread metamorphism ( and not simply widespread cooling ) occurred with the migrating arc magmatism and might be linked spatially to tectonic extrusion ( i.e. , collapse ) structures .
Their preliminary SHRIMP and EMP dating of metamorphic monazites appear to support this .
These data will provide the first direct timing constraints on both Penokean and post-Penokean metamorphism in the southern Lake Superior region.Metamorphic thermochronometry .
In the 1990 's , NSF-funded ( Holm ) Ar-Ar mineral age datawere used to document the timing and extent of orogenic cooling and later thermal reheatingacross the Penokean orogen .
For instance , abundant 1760-1720 Ma plateau cooling ages areinterpreted to be associated with a rapid crustal collapse/stabilization period and 1630-1600 Maplateau ages are interpreted to indicate reheating/deformation associated with the Matzatalorogeny to the south .
However , preliminary Ar-ion laser microprobe age data documents thepresence of significant age gradients across muscovite crystals ( 500 m.y .
in one case ) .
Theseresults merit further scrutiny of the existing thermochronologic data .
Specifically , do the 1630-1600 Ma Ar-Ar plateau ages i ) reflect the time of widespread deformation and mild reheating ; ii ) represent partial resetting associated with geon 14 magmatism ; iii ) or perhaps represent slowcooling ?
Ar-Ar muscovite laser probe age mapping will allow the PI 's to better constrain the medium-temperature history of the region and , especially to relate it to younger overprinting events in the thermally reheated areas .
The data collected in this study are critical to properly interpret the new igneous ages ( obtained by Van Schmus , Holm , and others ) and existing Ar-Ar ages and to evaluate the Proterozoic geology of southern Lake Superior region in the context of a long-lived convergent orogen model .
0207093WhiteThis research program addresses the study of carrier transport in advanced silicon carbide ( SiC ) devices .
The research focuses on the modeling , fabrication and electrical characterization of advanced SiC devices , including n and p-channel MOSFETs , and novel surface and buried-channel DIMOS and IGBT devices with particular emphasis on their utilization for power switching applications .
The research emphasizes the development of a low temperature fabrication sequence to reduce the detrimental effects of 'step bunching ' , while simultaneously achieving the required activation of the implanted species .
A goal of the research is to increase carrier inversion and accumulation-layer mobility through a combination of low temperature processing with an optimized gate dielectric .
The research focuses on the physical modeling of carrier mobility where electrons move in localized states at the SiC-SiO2 interface and are thermally activated into extended states in the conduction band .
A combination of thermal activation , surface roughness and point Coulomb scattering all play a role in limiting the carrier mobility and hence the specific ON resistance of SiC power MOSFETs .
The study of both electron and hole transport is important in planar SiC integrated circuit technology , particularly for 'smart ' power applications .
The research employs novel test structures , fabrication techniques and instrumentation to study the influence of surface and bulk traps on carrier transport in inversion and layers over an extended temperature range , while contributing to the advancement of SiC devices , particularly power semiconductor devices .
The PI 's propose a multidisciplinary study of Cretaceous and Tertiary rocks along an east-west transect in the Wrangell - Petersburg - Prince of Wales Island area of SE Alaska ( = Wrangell transect ) .
Previous research demonstrates that integration of paleomagnetic studies with geochronologic , therinochronologic , barometric , and structural geologic observations can produce important insights into the tectonic evolution of the Insular superterrane and Coast Mountains orogen in western BC and SE Alaska .
The PI 's recent results from near Prince Rupert show that paleomagnetism is a key component of multidisciplinary efforts investigating exhumed shallow and mid-crustal sections .
When accompanied by geologic observations resulting from a carefully coordinated multidisciplinary research program , paleomagnetic data on intrusive igneous rocks 'eld critical information on the tectonic development of deformed yiregions that can not otherwise be obtained .
For example , the PI 's have documented that panels of crust containing the Paleocene Quottoon igneous complex east of the Coast shear zone have experienced east-side-up tilts ranging to 40 ' during Eocene extension .
In addition , their geochronologic , palcomagnetic , barometric , and structural geologic data suggest that the midCretaceous Ecstall pluton was folded during west-directed thrusting .
These discoveries are fundamental to understanding the crustal architecture and tectonic development of the continental margin in the northern Cordillera.Because igneous rocks were emplaced into this part of the magmatic arc during the Cretaceous , throughout the Paleogene , and into the Miocene , the Wrangell transect provides the opportunity to track deformation of an evolving convergent to strike-slip plate margin in space and time .
Methods will include U/Pb geochronology of zircon and spheric , Al-in-homblende barometry , 40 Ar/39 Ar thennochronology , ( U-Th ) /He dating of zircon , metamorphic petrology , and structural geologic investigations in addition to paleomagnetic analysis .
Preliminary investigations on the eastern portion of the transect indicate that this area experienced - 1 7 ' ESEside-up tilt about an axis with azimuth 22 ' since 20 Ma .
Observations from across the transect indicate that paleomagnetic directions from Cretaceous plutons are variable , with both concordant and discordant inclinations .
Paleomagnetic study of the Cretaceous and Tertiary igneous rocks of the Wrangell transect , coupled with the geochronologic , thennochronologic , and barometric analyses , can determine ( 1 ) when and where Cenozoic defontiation occurred ; and ( 2 ) whether regionally consistent tilting/folding and/or large-scale transport can account for discordant paleomagnetic directions from Cretaceous plutons .
Combined with results from the Prince Rupert area , successful completion of the proposed research can provide a comprehensive model for the tectonic and paleogeographic evolution of the Coast Mountains and Insular superterrane for the past I 00 m.y .
The intricacy and complexity of condensed matter systems are often succinctly expressed through effective theories valid in the limit of large length and time scales .
Such theories , both in equilibrium and non-equilibrium statistical mechanics , arise out of a coarse-graining process which relies on a separation of microscopic and macroscopic length and time scales .
This separation of scales becomes suspect in systems where extended spatial structures lead to large scale heterogeneities .
There is mounting evidence from experiments and simulations that such structures exist in granular systems , supercooled liquids and foams .
It is also well established that the dynamical behavior of these systems set them apart from ordinary liquids and suggests that the complexity of dynamical behavior and response can be traced back to occurrence of extended spatial structures .
One way of unraveling this complexity is to identify the extended structures responsible for the anomalous dynamics , and then construct 'effective ' equations of motion for these extended degrees of freedom .
The objective of this theoretical research project is to formulate effective models at the mesoscopic scale of these heterogeneities ; a scale intermediate between the microscopic one characteristic of molecular dynamics simulations and the macroscopic one entering hydrodynamic descriptions .
Such a formulation should provide a direct interface between theory and experiments since the information at the mesoscopic scale is often directly available from experiments .
Numerical simulations will be used as a stepping stone in the construction of effective dynamical theories .
The techniques will be developed in the context of lattice models and then extended to continuum models .
By focusing on geometrical structures at the mesoscopic scale , the project aims to explore the emergence of macroscopic physical properties from microscopic interactions. % % % This theoretical project investigates complex and disordered condensed matter systems , such as glasses , and attempts to determine how behavior at the microscopic scale affects behavior at the large scale .
This is a fundamental problem in science whose solution would have wide impact .
*** Plate circuit calculations indicate that motion of the Pacific plate relative to North American plate changed from westerly to NW at ~8 Ma .
This observation corresponds extremely well with geologic data which indicates that motion of the Sierran-Great Valley block relative to the Colorado Plateau changed from westerly to NW at ~8-10 Ma .
Geologic studies indicate that the rate of right lateral shear at ~8 Ma within the Eastern California Shear Zone north of the Garlock fault was ~15 mm/yr accounting for ~30 % of relative plate motion .
Geodetic studies indicate a present-day dextral shear rate of 10-12 mm/yr , providing clear evidence that the Eastern California Shear Zone is still an important component of deformation within the Pacific-North America plate boundary zone .
In spite of its tectonic importance , the space-time evolution of much of the Eastern California Shear Zone is only broadly understood .
This proposal requests support for investigating the kinematics of a system of intraplate dextral faults in the northern part of the Eastern California Shear Zone using an integrated approach of field mapping , tectonic geomorphology , paleoseismology , and geochronology .
The proposed research is motivated by ongoing geodetic investigations on present-day magnitude of strain accumulation and spatial distribution across the Eastern California Shear Zone .
In light of these geodetic constraints on strain accumulation , it is timely to improve the understanding of the spatial and temporal patterns of strain release during the late Neogene and Quaternary .
The two data sets will provide important constraints on geodynamic hypotheses proposed for the evolution of the Eastern California Shear Zone .
An accurate characterization of the spatial and temporal patterns of strain release within the Eastern California Shear Zone is crucial for understanding tectonic processes over a much broader area of intraplate deformation associated with the interaction of the Pacific and North American plates .
This is a low temperature physics research project .
Liquid He-3 and liquid He-4 are paradigm systems that exhibit macroscopic quantum behavior , obeying respectively Fermi and Bose statistics .
While a great deal has been learned about these quantum liquids in bulk , fascinating results are still being discovered in atomically thin films of He-3 and He-4 adsorbed on surfaces .
Recent measurements found that He-3 atoms tend to float on top of a He-4 film and phase separate into 2-dimensional vapor and liquid phases .
Heat capacity measurements are planned to elucidate the nature of this phase separation/transition to determine whether this intrinsically quantum system is also a physical realization of the celebrated 2D Ising model of Onsager .
Nuclear magnetic resonance and heat capacity measurements will study the properties of He-3 and He-4 adsorbed in MCM-41 , a highly porous substrate with one dimensional pores of 2.5 to 5.0 nm in diameter and up to 500 nm in length .
Results of these measurements will be tested against the theories of one dimensional quantum systems .
Undergraduate and graduate students involved in these experiments receive rigorous training in cryogenic , high vacuum and ultrasensitive electronic measurements .
They must integrate these skills to complete demanding experiments , a process that quickly and elegantly prepares them for careers in government , industry and academe.This is a low temperature physics project .
All substances freeze into solid when the temperature is reduced .
The exceptions being liquid He-3 and He-4 , which remain liquid even at absolute zero .
The reason for this is related to the quantum uncertainty principle .
Although chemically identical , He-3 has one neutron and two protons in its nucleus and He-4 has two of each .
All atoms are either Fermion or Boson depending on the total number of neutrons , protons and electrons they have .
This rule makes He-3 a Fermion and He-4 a Boson , and as a consequence , liquid He-3 and liquid He-4 behave quite differently , particularly when these quantum fluids are forced into volumes where at least one dimension is nanoscopic .
This project seeks to understand the properties of one and two-dimensional Fermion and Boson systems , namely He-3 and He-4 atoms confined in atomically thin films , or in tiny one-dimensional pores , with diameters in the range 2.5 to 5.0 nanometers .
The knowledge we gain in studying these quantum liquids contributes to the understanding of superconductors and other electronic systems .
Undergraduate and graduate students involved in these experiments receive rigorous training in cryogenic , high vacuum and ultrasensitive electronic measurements .
They must integrate these skills to complete demanding experiments , a process that quickly and elegantly prepares them for careers in government , industry and academe .
This project involved the development and application of a proton-transfer-reaction mass spectrometry ( PTR-MS ) for on-line detection and identification of volatile organic compounds ( VOCs ) for the analysis of primary and secondary biogenic carbonyls in complex VOC mixtures released from vegetation .
The new instrument , a proton-transfer ion trap mass spectrometry ( PT-ITMS ) instrument , will be developed for used in both field and airborne platforms for continuous , simultaneous analysis of important VOCs and their carbonyl oxidation products .
VOCs released from vegetation may have a major impact on the oxidative capacity of the atmosphere and in the formation of ozone and aerosols .
EROSION BENEATH THE LAURENTIDE ICE SHEET , AND ITS ROLE INPLEISTOCENE ICE AGE DYNAMICSSubglacial erosion and sediment dynamics influence the size , stability , and climatic sensitivity of large ice sheets .
These processes may regulate large-scale surging behavior , initiating rapid shifts in climate and sea level ( MacAyeal , 1993a , b ) , and perhaps dictate the periodicity of the Quaternary ice ages ( Clark and Pollard , 1998 ) .
We intuitivly associate the scoured landscapes of the northern continents with subglacial erosion , yet estimates of the rates , timing and spatial pattern of erosion by the Pleistocene ice sheets are conflicting or ambiguous .
Subglacial erosion is difficult to study because ( i ) The processes involved take place beneath large ice sheets .
( ii ) As in all eroding landscapes , the record of change is continually effaced as the surface is removed , and ( iii ) Although thick deposits of Pleistocene glacial sediment , which contain information about erosional conditions , survive around the margins of former ice sheets , they are patchily preserved and difficult to date.We propose to study the history of erosion by the Laurentide ice sheet , using thecosmogenic isotopes 10 Be and 26 Al .
First , we will date glacial sedimentary sequences at the southern margin of the former ice sheet using the technique of burial dating ( Granger et al. , 1997 ) .
Cosmogenic 10 Be and 26 Al are produced within the crystal structure of sedimentary quartz grains while the sediment is exposed to cosmic radiation near the Earth 's surface .
Once the sediment is buried , these isotopes decay at different rates and their ratio provides a measure of the burial time .
We have used this technique in trial measurements on glaciofluvial sands interbedded with till , providing stratigraphically consistent mid-Pleistocene bracketing ages on previously undated glacial deposits .
Second , we will use atmospherically-produced 10 Be , which accumulates in soils and is highly concentrated near the surface of deeply weathered terrains , to investigate the contribution of pre-glacial regolith to Laurentide tills .
We presume the deep regolith that covered the Canadian Shield prior to the Quaternary must have contained an enormous inventory of 10 Be , far exceeding what could have accumulated on the craton during Quaternary interglacial periods .
By measuring the 10 Be content of sediments eroded and deposited by the Laurentide ice sheet throughout the Pleistocene , we will track the removal of pre-glacial regolith and evaluate the ice sheet 's response to the onset of hard-bed conditions .
Our initial measurements show that mid-Pleistocene tills contain enormous concentrations of 'meteoric ' 10 Be .
Concentrations in Wisconsin till are two orders of magnitude lower .
It appears that the Laurentide ice sheet was 'mining ' a cover of heavily-weathered surficial material in the middle Pleistocene , but that this source has now been largely exhausted.We will apply these methods to well-studied sequences of till and interbedded glaciofluvial sediments in southwestern Minnesota , and early Pleistocene tills bracketed by well-dated ash layers in drill cores from South Dakota and Nebraska .
This combination will provide samples of material eroded by the Laurentide Ice Sheet throughout the Pleistocene .
The field area in southwestern Minnesota provides access to at least nine separate till units in outcrop and drill core .
Extensive prior work in the area , and easy access to both surface and subsurface samples make it ideal for this study .
The Fields Institute in Toronto , Ontario is running an intensiveprogram in Applications of Set Theory to Analysis from Septemberto December 2002 .
This is an award for the support of juniorU.S .
participants in that international program .
Long-termactivities in the semester include graduate courses and seminars , and shorter activities include a workshop on Descriptive SetTheory and a workshop on Banach Spaces , Algebras , and Subspacesof Baire Class 1 Functions.Even people whose only contact with higher mathematics comes fromwatching reruns of Star Trek or The Simpsons will have encounteredthe phenomenon that the decimal expansion of Pi requires infinitelymany digits .
The ratio of the circumference of a circle to itsdiameter , therefore , is a manifestation of the actual , as opposed tojust the potential , infinite .
While the existence of the actualinfinite has had a profound influence on mathematics , its acceptancewas not immediate and the history of the subject is fraught withcontroversy .
Two major branches of mathematics which devote much oftheir resources to the study of the infinite are analysis and settheory .
Much of analysis is concerned with understanding limitingbehaviour in various contexts .
A simple prototype of this is found inconsidering the number Pi as the limit of increasingly longer finitedecimal approximations to Pi .
Many of the spaces which analysts studyconsist of limits of simpler objects .
Set theory , on the other hand , studies the infinite in a more abstract setting , concentrating on thecombinatorial and structural implications of the infinite .
While theconnections between set theory and analysis have always beenacknowledged , too much of the work in these two areas has gone onlargely unheeded by researchers in the other area .
The chief purposeof the current proposal is to create an environment where leading settheorists and analysts can collaborate on problems which straddle theboundaries of their subjects .
This three-year project explores the influence of two modes of investigation , 1st- and 2nd-hand , on student development of scientific knowledge and reasoning .
In 1st-hand investigations students have direct experience with phenomena .
In the 2nd-hand investigations students interact with informal text , either in a traditional format or an innovative format modeled after the notebook of a scientist .
The project proposes to conduct a series of three studies in schools with diverse populations rural , urban-poor , and urban bilingual .
In Study 1 and 2 , the instruction of the unit will be done by the investigators and will be conducted with groups of 12 students during the school day .
In Study 3 the instruction will be done by the teachers and it will involve four whole classes .
Study 1 is a mixed experimental design in which 48 students will participate .
Students , matched for general achievement , will be randomly assigned to four sequences .
Sequence varies mode of instruction ( 1st- and 2nd-hand investigations ) and topic ( force- and mass-motion ) .
Instruction will be videotaped , and interviews will be conducted to a randomly selected sample of 4 students on each group .
Study 2 includes a third variable mode of 2nd-hand investigations , traditional or notebook .
It is a five-condition study involving different sequences .
During this study , a classroom observation instrument will be developed .
Study 3 will involve the implementation of the conditions that proved to have the best outcomes in Study 2 .
The study will try to identify individual differences that may interact with the type of condition .
Instruction will be documented ( taped ) twice during the course of each mode of investigation .
The classroom observation instrument will be administered during each investigation .
A random sample of 8 students within each class will be interviewed twice in each instructional phase .
The study will advance understanding of how instruction can maximize student learning in different inquiry contexts .
A new classroom observation tool will be developed Current intrusion detection systems ( IDSs ) usually generate many false alerts and often do not detect novel attacks or variations of known attacks .
Moreover , most existing IDSs focus on low-level attacks oranomalies ; none capture the logical steps or strategies behind these attacks .
In situations where there are intensive intrusions , not only will actual alerts be mixed with false alerts , but the number ofalerts will also become unmanageable .
As a result , it is difficult for human users or intrusion response systems to understand the nature of the attack and to take appropriate actions.To address these issues , this project will investigate techniques to correlate intrusion alerts on the basis of the prerequisites and consequences of attacks .
The research uses a formal and rigorousapproach to study the fundamental issues involved in alert correlation , including representation of prerequisites and consequences of attacks , efficient algorithms to process alerts , expressiveness of the high-level representation mechanisms , effectiveness of the technique in reducing false alerts , impact offalse alerts and undetected attacks on the technique , and methods to predict attacks in progress .
Expected impacts of the proposed research include ( 1 ) a reduction in the number of false alerts , ( 2 ) identification of attackers ' high-level strategies , and ( 3 ) early configuration of effective defenses against attacks in progress .
If successful , the research will lead to better tools for intrusiondetection and thus to improved computer and network security .
Optical communication , in particular , wavelength-division multiplexing ( WDM ) technique , has become a promising networking choice to meet ever-increasing demands on bandwidth from many emerging bandwidth-intensive computing/communication applications .
As optics become a major networking media , optical interconnects will inevitably play an important role in interconnecting processors in parallel/distributed computing systems .
This research focuses on fundamental challenges and issues on using optics in two converging areas parallel/distributed computing and communications .
The objective of this research is to design high-speed , cost-effective optical interconnects for current and future generation parallel/distributed computing and communication systems .
Due to the unique characteristics of optics , many important issues of optical interconnects , different from those of electronic interconnects , need to be addressed .
Specially , this research focuses on ( 1 ) explore unique properties and classifications of WDM interconnects ; ( 2 ) optimal and cost-effective designs ; ( 3 ) study the effect of wavelength conversion ; ( 4 ) performance modeling ; ( 5 ) fault-tolerance issues .
The proposed research combines architecture/circuit design , algorithmic , probabilistic , combinatorial and simulation techniques to conduct comprehensive studies on the above issues .
The research results will provide viable solutions for designing high-bandwidth , high-connectivity , low-latency and low-cost optical interconnects .
The proposed research will have a significant impact on next generation arallel/distributed computing and communication systems and future networking infrastructure .
The creation of the supercontinent of Gondwana is one of the most significant geologic events in the history of our planet yet the processes that led to its formation are poorly understood .
In its predrift position near the dawn of the Cambrian , Madagascar was situated in the interior of Gondwana near the eastern edge of the East African Orogen ( EAO ) .
This orogen marks the join between East and West Gondwana , and it contains within it pieces of recycled continental crust , ophiolite , and island-arc and continental-arc terranes that formed within and marginal to the former Mozambique Ocean .
Madagascar is thus critically positioned to reveal three key and currently enigmatic features of the EAO essential for understanding the transformation from Rodinia to Gondwana ( 1 ) the nature of the volcanic terranes in the central part of the EAO and their possible extensions in Somalia , Ethiopia , and Rajasthan ( India ) ; ( 2 ) the chronology of terrane-suturing and continental collision events in the critical join between East and West Gondwana , and ; ( 3 ) the structure of the eastern part of the EAO in the key transitional area from dominantly terrane-accreted geology ( in the north ) to continental collision and crustal overthickening ( in the south ) .Pl 's Tucker and Kusky propose to undertake a two-year structural and geochronologic investigation of the polydeformed and metamorphosed Precambrian rocks of central Madagascar ( Itremo region ) .
Work in this area holds great promise for resolving two first-order geologic questions in the eastern part of the East African Orogen ( 1 ) What is the direction of early structural vergence ( nappe emplacement ) in the eastern part of the East African Orogen and what is the geometry of the superposed folds of central Madagascar ?
Is the structural vergence westerly or southwesterly , as has been recently proposed ( Racolison 1997 , Fernandez et al .
in revision ) , or is it easterly or southeasterly as advocated by others ( Tucker et al .
1997 and in revision ; Collins et al .
2000 a , b ) ?
Are other solutions possible ?
( 2 ) When did Pan-African defon-nation and metamorphism begin in the southern part of the EAO .
Were the nappes of central Madagascar initially transported and metamorphosed prior to -800 Ma ( Cox et al .
1998 ; Collins et al .
2000 a , b ; Hulscher et al 2001 ) ?
Alternatively , were they emplaced and metamorphosed after -800 Ma ( Tucker et al .
1997 , and in revison ; Fernandez et al .
in revision ; Cox et al .
2001 ) .
These questions are central to understanding the timing and geometry of plate convergence within the EAO .
The Itremo region of central Madagascar is the best place to study and address these issues it is situated within the region of Neoproterozoic overprinting , only - 1 50 km from the proposed suture with East Gondwana ; bedrock exposure is superb and the contrasting rock types permit accurate mapping of folds and faults ; stratigraphic facing directions are abundant and hence the inverted limbs of recumbent folds and thrust nappes can be readily identified , and ; reliable cross-sections may be constructed owing to the consistent regional plunge of the youngest-generation folds.Research will proceed through an integrated program of geologic mapping , structural analysis , and U-Pb geochronology .
Structural investigations and sample collections will be made in three key areas within the Itremo region , tentatively identified as comprising the inverted limbs of large-scale east-directed told- or thrust-nappes ( Tucker et al .
in revision ) .
Stratigraphic analysis , structural investigations and detailed mapping projects are designed to test our structural hypothesis and increase our knowledge of the regional geometry of the folds and faults .
U-Pb geochronology of key samples will constrain the age of nappe emplacement and regional metamorphism , and provide a critical test of our collision model .
This work will lead to a new understanding of the kinematics , age and overall structural vergence in the critical , eastern part of the EAO where strongly divergent views of its evolution are emerging .
Research will involve collaboration between professional colleagues in Madagascar and the U.S. , and allow for the participation and training of American and Malagasy students in field- and laboratory-based research .
An MPS Distinguished International Postdoctoral Research Fellowship ( MPS-DRF ) will be used to develop an optobioelectronic switch by functionalizing gold nanoparticles with photoisomerizable thiols .
There will be three stages in this project ( 1 ) Synthesis and characterization of gold particles , ( 2 ) functionalization of nanoparticles with photoisomerizable molecules and characterization of the transduction of the optical signal using bulk measurement techniques , and ( 3 ) use of STM-SNOM to simultaneously provide the optical signal and measure the electrochemical transduction of that signal at a functionized nanoparticle .
Most of the program will be hosted at Wolfgang Knoll 's group at the Max Planck Institut fur Polymerforschung , where expertise will be provided in surface functionalization and characterization and the infrastructure necessary to achieve the objectives of this project .
One month will be spent at Franz Aussenegg 's group at the Institut fur Experimentalphysik at the Karl-Franzens-Universitat Graz , Austria , where there is expertise with nano-optics necessary to use the STM-SNOM system for these experiments .
Another month will be spent with Itamar Willner in the Department of Organic Chemistry at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem , Israel , where the thiols will be provided and also advice will be obtained on implementing them in building the proposed optobioelectronic switch .
DMS-0207125Peter Perry and Carolyn Gordon This award provides partial support for active research mathematicians with limited means of support to attend and participate in the Conference on Inverse Spectral geometry to be held at the University of Kentucky , June 20-28 , 2002 .
The conference will consist of two parts .
The first ( June 20-22 ) is a series of special lectures by Steven Zelditch ( Johns Hopkins University ) , Richard Beals ( Yale University ) , Peter Perry ( University of Kentucky ) , and Tanya Christiansen ( University of Missouri ) covering inverse spectral problems , scattering theory , and analysis on the Heisenberg group .
The second is a workshop on inverse spectral geometry ( June 24-28 ) with three morning lectures and one afternoon lecture to allow maximum time for discussion and collaboration .
Conference themes are ( 1 ) Scattering theory for the Heisenberg group and Two-Step Nilpotent Lie Groups ( 2 ) Direct and inverse scattering problems for the Laplacian on exterior domains and non-compact Riemannian manifolds ( 3 ) Geometric invariants which are ( are not ) spectral invariants on compact Riemannian manifolds ( 4 ) Geometry of the Hodge Laplacian on p-forms on compact Riemannian manifolds Further information is available at http//www.ms.uky.edu/~isgconf/ or from the conference organizers Peter A. Perry perry @ ms.uky.edu Carolyn Gordon Carolyn.S.Gordon @ Dartmouth.edu This project addresses a new and unique technique for estimating the daytime , vertical ExB drift velocities in the equatorial ionospheric F region from ground-based magnetometer observations .
It has recently been demonstrated , quantitatively , that the strength of the daytime upward ExB drift velocity is linearly related to the difference between the horizontal H component values measured by a magnetometer located on the magnetic equator and one 6 to 9 degrees away in latitude .
This project plans to extend the results of this unique finding by asking the fundamental question How does this delta H versus ExB relationship vary with season , geomagnetic activity and solar activity ?
An answer to this question provides answers in turn to a variety of space weather scientific questions as well as applying the technique , immediately , to Operational Real Time Ionospheric Specification and Forecast Models currently under development in support of civilian and military customers .
This action funds an NSF Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowship for FY2002 .
The goal of the fellowship is to prepare minority scientists for positions of scientific leadership in academia and industry .
To attain this goal , the fellowship provides opportunities for postdoctoral training of the highest quality to recent doctoral recipients .
This program is an effort by the NSF to increase the number of research scientists from underrepresented minority groups , thereby contributing to the future vitality of the Nation 's scientific enterprise .
It is expected that Fellows trained through these fellowships will play important roles in training the future workforce.The research and training plan for this fellowship is entitled Role of Chondroitin Sulfate Proteoglycans in Synapse Formation .
The project examines the role of two chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans ( CSPGs ) in synaptogenesis one unnamed CSPG , recognized by monoclonal antibody Cat-315 , which delineates synaptic sites , and aggrecan , the main CSPG of cartilage .
The unnamed CSPG is being identified using immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry .
Once identified , its function will be blocked to determine if it is essential to synapse formation .
To determine if aggrecan is involved in synaptogenesis , the expression of synpatic markers is being studied in cultured cortices from embryonic CMD mice , a naturally occurring aggrecan knockout mouse .
This project seeks to investigate State-to-State differences in National Assessment of Education Progress ( NAEP ) test items to determine how state policies have affected changes in NAEP scores .
The study addresses the problem of assessing the contributions of State policies on student achievement .
The purpose of the project is to develop empirical measures for the effects on student achievement of reform practices .
It would analyze the content of individual items to better measure specific aspects of student learning that might have been affected by the policies of that State .
Also , they would build a mathematical model of the value-added of state policies .
Reid F. Cooper , Principal InvestigatorUniversity of Wisconsin-Madison The measurement of the low-frequency attenuation behavior of polycrystalline olivine aggregates , of olivine-orthopyroxene aggregates and of olivine-based partial melts will be pursued .
Specifically , the polycrystalline materials , which will have carefully engineered microstructures , will be subjected to dynamic ( sub-resonant , oscillatory loading ) and quasistatic ( constant loading , i.e. , creep ) so as to evaluate the attenuation behavior as functions of ( i ) temperature ( 1150 to 1350 degC ) , ( ii ) frequency ( 2x10e-4 to 1 Hz ) , ( iii ) phase volume fraction and morphology ( phase percolation and phase separation/layering in the solid state ; melt segregation beyond the grain scale in partial melts ) , and ( iv ) dislocation-creep sub-microstructure .
The study/characterization of microstructural effects ( engineered into these specimens so as to mimic deformation-induced microstructures ) on seismic-frequency absorption is one key to applying seismic data to infer deformation behavior in active tectonic terranes .
Proposal # 0207154PI Yanni ZengInstitution University of Alabama BirminghamTitle Conservation laws with partial dissipation in continuum mechanicsThis project is concerned with systems of conservation laws ( balance laws ) , a broad class of nonlinear partial differential equations ( PDEs ) arising from continuum mechanics .
Of special interest are equations with partial dissipation , including hyperbolic-parabolic systems , hyperbolic systems with fading memory , and hyperbolic systems with relaxation .
The purpose of the research is to obtain a better understanding of the underlying physical phenomena through the study of the qualitative behavior of the solutions of the PDEs .
The first objective is to obtain the nonlinear stability of shock profiles for hyperbolic systems with relaxation , including fully dissipative systems and those containing one non-decaying wave in a linearly degenerate field ( systems of composite type ) .
The second objective is to obtain a similar stability result for initial boundary-value problems for hyperbolic-parabolic systems , especially to understand the effect of the boundary .
The third objective is to extend the study to contact discontinuities and rarefaction waves .
The research conducted under this award is relevant for the study of compressible viscous flows , the motion of viscoelastic materials , gas dynamics in thermal nonequilibrium , and magnetohydrodynamics .
By including viscosity , heat conduction , electrical resistivity , excited internal structures of molecules , chemical reactions , and so on we focus on mathematical models that are closer to the real world than the traditional ideal ones .
The project has three specific objectives .
The first objective is to understand the stability properties of shock profiles in , for example , high-temperature gas flows when the internal structure of molecules and chemical reactions are no longer negligible .
This problem arises , for example , at the reentry of a space shuttle into the atmosphere and is quite different from the traditional supersonic flight of an airplane .
The second objective is to better understand gas flows near a solid surface .
The third objective is to study more complete wave patterns in several cases .
0207495HearnThis award provides partial support to upgrade the computational facilities for the solid-earth geophysics program at New Mexico State University .
This upgrade enables the geophysics program to stay abreast of technological advances in computing , networking , security , and archiving .
Purchasing a 16-node Beowulf cluster is central to our efforts .
It will provide high-speed computational power for relatively low-cost .
There are two major projects , mantle dynamics and microstructural evolution of rocks , which require three-dimensional parallel simulations .
Most of these simulations are currently being done at off-campus sites using the TERRA mantle convection code developed at Los Alamos and a Monte Carlo code developed at Sandia National Laboratories .
They will be implemented on the Beowulf .
Support will also be used to replace our current system of older Sun workstations with more modern workstations .
New storage with a RAID array and large-volume tape backup are needed for today 's larger data volumes .
These computer systems will support data storage and analysis from field seismology projects located in China , the southwest U.S. , and Mexico , and to support projects in seismic tomography and geodynamics .
*** There is a substantial demand for mathematical talent in the biomedical sciences .
This IGMS grant will help meet this demand by providing training in physiology , which is one of the more mathematical areas of the biosciences , for Donald French .
He will spend one year jointly hosted by two Professors in the College of Medicine at his home institution.In particular , they will investigate a system of self-organizing neurons that form a signaling network which undergoes synchronized intracellular calcium oscillations .
French will also take courses in neuroscience and cell biology ; attend conferences in Neuroscience ; teach a course entitled `` Computational Neuroscience '' ; and mentor a mathematics graduate student.The planned research is interesting since it will involve the collaboration between a theoretician and experimentalists .
The investigation will be on a network of neurons that can be viewed as a complex system and a focus of the work will be on emergent properties such as synchronized calcium oscillations .
This in-depth experience will provide the appropriate training so French can develop his own research program .
This research program will not necessarily be limited to neuroscience .
For example , the type of neuronal modeling being done during the immersion year is similar to mathematical modeling used to describe cardiac function.This grant will extend knowledge in Physiology through research on neuronal networks and advance human resource development by training the PI in Physiology .
It will also provide a highly interdisciplinary research experience in Mathematical Physiology for the PI 's graduate student .
After the term of the grant French will continue to provide leadership in Mathematical Physiology at his home Mathematics Department through his teaching and research .
These activities will enrich the educational experience for students and broaden their career options .
This IGMS project is jointly supported by the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities ( OMA ) and the Division of Mathematical Sciences ( DMS ) .
The project is on a novel surface nanocrystallization and hardening ( SNH ) process wherein metallic parts are impacted with high-energy balls under a controlled atmosphere .
It will be suitable for both large and small engineering components and offer superior fatigue and wear properties derived from the synergy of the tailored microstructure , the smooth gradients of both composition and grain size , and the desired residual stress distribution .
The University of Connecticut ( UConn ) and the University of Tennessee ( UT ) have joined together to investigate the key issues related to the SNH process .
UConn will bring in expertise in the high-energy ball milling and SNH process , while UT will provide expertise in the area of fatigue mechanisms and modeling .
A major goal of the study are to develop and construct a special SNH machine with independent control of a variety of the SNH process variables such as the surface grain size , grain-size gradient , composition gradient , formation of new compounds , residual stresses , and surface finishing .
The objective of the project is to perform systematic and comprehensive experiments to establish the processing maps for surface nanocrystallization of the Ti-6-4 alloy including detailed microstructure and dislocation density studies using high-resolution transmission electron microscopy ( HREM ) .
Based on the mechanisms established , analytical and numerical models will be developed to predict the general trend of surface nanocrystallization .
Mechanical properties of the SNH-processed Ti-6-4 alloys will be quantified using nanoindentation , pin-on-disc wear , and high-cycle fatigue tests .
The fatigue mechanisms established in these studies will be used as a basis to develop theoretic models for the prediction of fatigue crack initiation and propagation behavior in the material with surface nano-grains and a grain-size gradient.The work under this grant attempts to develop bulk nanocrystalline metallic components with superior mechanical properties through the development and testing of a new process known as surface nanocrystallization and hardening ( SNH ) .
The ultra fine grain size in the surface with appropriate grain size gradient into the bulk is expected to result in improved fatigue life of the structural components .
The project plans include participation of undergraduate and high school students along with graduate researchers .
Magma Fractionation Processes and Timescales Fogo , Furnas and Fuji VolcanoesEAR- 0207529 PI WidomThis project is a combined volcanological , geochemical , isotopic and geochronologic study of recent , highly evolved and chemically zoned eruptive products of Fogo and Furnas volcanoes in the Azores ( Portugal ) , and Fuji volcano in Japan .
The project will involve petrographic and microprobe analysis , major and trace element and Sr-Nd-Pb isotope analysis , and U-series disequilibria studies of whole rock pumices and mineral and glass separates , as well as high precision Ar-Ar dating of feldspar separates .
Specific questions that will be addressed include the role of open vs. closed system processes during magmatic differentiation , the timescales over which magma differentiation and chemical zonation occur , and the relationship between magma residence timescales and eruptive volumes .
The combined studies of eruptions from the Azores and Fuji will allow comparisons of the processes and timescales operating in magmatic systems in distinct tectonic settings ( intraplate vs. subduction zone ) , and in magmatic systems that are compositionally distinct ( alkaline vs. calc-alkaline ) .
0207090ConnorThe goal of this project is to stimulate students from groups that are currently underrepresented in the sciences to choose careers in environmental biology .
This objective will be met by involving students in positive and productive research experiences and by providing close mentoring , group learning activities , and careful advising .
Students will work with experienced and aspiring research scientists and environmental professionals in seminars and informal gatherings , thus providing a basis for students to imagine themselves in careers in environmental biology .
Students will participate in research focused on understanding 1 ) the impact of urbanization and agriculture via habitat loss , fragmentation , and degradation , and 2 ) the effects of introduced species on native species and communities .
Recruiting students from groups underrepresented to careers in environmental biology will broaden participation of all parts of our society in learning how to preserve the natural environment .
Focusing on the impact of habitat loss , fragmentation , and introduced species associated with urbanization and agriculture will provide valuable information that may enable us to preserve native species and communities within a human-dominated landscape .
.
This small grant for exploratory research will support investigation of the use of media-rich instrumented environments in the performing and media arts .
Using as the driver application a specific large-scale performance work , based on Homer 's The Iliad , this project will begin development of a distributed control system .
An important aspect of this system will be the ability of the audience to interact with the performance environment .
Participants start their experience through a survey on a website , which populates a database used throughout the performance process .
In the venue itself , which consists of a gallery as well as performance spaces , participants will be linked to their database records using standard radio frequency identification tags in their tickets , which are read by ubiquitous antennas .
Media and story choices in the space will be adapted , based on the particular audience members attending on the particular day .
As the experience progresses , the database will be updated with sensor data and images collected from the performance .
The responsive environment is created by the interconnection of the database , sensors , and automated production equipment for the control of lighting , sound , motorized scenery , and video or image projection.In the information society of the twenty-first century , technologies to manage , enable , and advance cultural innovation will be among the most valuable assets of civilization .
This project will explore an emerging area that could be of great commercial , social , and scientific importance in the coming decades .
Collaborative Research U-Series , Be , Sr , Nd and Pb Isotopic and Trace Element Constraints on Melting and Mass Transfer Processes in Arcs , Philippine Arc SystemEAR-0208095 ; EAR-0207429 ; EAR-0207830PIs Asmerom ; Morris ; MukasaNet material cycling between the mantle and continental crust occurs primarily in arcs .
Many processes related to melting and mass transfer in arcs , such as the relative contributions of melting and devolatilization in transferring elements from sediment and altered oceanic crust or the relative roles of dynamic , decompression or flux melting of the mantle wedge , however , remain enigmatic .
This Collaborative proposal will focus on Luzon , located in the tectonically simpler part of the Philippines arc , to compare two different arc settings in close proximity that may have had dissimilar geochemical histories .
The presumed difference in sediment contribution makes the proposed site an ideal setting for studying mass transfer processes and their possible effects on mantle melting .
Combined U-series and Be isotopic data , in conjunction with long-lived radiogenic and trace element data will be used to study these rocks .
The following goals are set forth 1 ) to characterize lavas , using major , trace and Nd , Sr and Pb isotopic data , from four volcanic centers , two from each arc in order to delineate attributes of each subduction zone ; 2 ) to determine the nature and composition of the sediment component and the mechanism by which it is added to the mantle ; 3 ) to investigate the role of dynamic melting in arcs ; and 4 ) to investigate the behavior of U-series nuclides during magma differentiation .
This project will develop a self-consistent model of the near-Earth portion of the plasma sheet .
It will specify the particle distributions , the effects of the plasma sheet on the magnetic field , and the effects of the plasma sheet on the formation of the ring current during magnetic storms .
The approach will be to use test particle tracing techniques in conjunction with an MHD code .
The technique will couple the particle tracing with the MHD modeling in a way that will produce a self-consistent model without using the basic MHD approximations that are invalid within the inner plasma sheet .
This approach has already been used in modeling the quiet-time plasma sheet and the method will now be extended to conditions of enhanced convection , including the growth phase of substorms and convection bays ( steady magnetospheric convection ) .
During the later stages of the project the model will be extended beyond a 2-D plasma sheet model to include field-aligned currents within the plasma sheet .
This project will develop a self-consistent model of the near-Earth portion of the plasma sheet .
It will specify the particle distributions , the effects of the plasma sheet on the magnetic field , and the effects of the plasma sheet on the formation of the ring current during magnetic storms .
The approach will be to use test particle tracing techniques in conjunction with an MHD code .
The technique will couple the particle tracing with the MHD modeling in a way that will produce a self-consistent model without using the basic MHD approximations that are invalid within the inner plasma sheet .
This approach has already been used in modeling the quiet-time plasma sheet and the method will now be extended to conditions of enhanced convection , including the growth phase of substorms and convection bays ( steady magnetospheric convection ) .
During the later stages of the project the model will be extended beyond a 2-D plasma sheet model to include field-aligned currents within the plasma sheet .
EAR-0207690University of California-Santa CruzThis study continues investigations of the paleoseismology and paleogeodesy of the Sumatran subduction zone in order to determine possible regularity of periods between fault ruptures , repeatability of pattern of slip on faults , influence of geologic structure on fault rupture , and variation of seismic/aseismic coupling with time .
The centerpiece of the study is the use of coral heads ( Porites and other genera ) that are sensitive to sea level changes with uncertainties of a few centimeters .
Annual growth bands give time-series with relative errors of a few years and U-Th dating of the heads gives dates with errors of a decade .
The magnitude of vertical deformation associated with earthquakes ( paleoseismology ) and deformation in intervals between earthquakes ( paleogeodesy ) are being determined from these data .
Results are being modeled and historical earthquakes ( seismograms from a variety of sources ) are being used to determine if segment boundaries influenced dimensions of historical ruptures .
The specific goals of this project are to ( 1 ) better characterize source parameters of 1681 , 1797 , and 1833 events ; ( 2 ) determine southern limit of these events ; ( 3 ) extend record back to 14th century ; ( 4 ) determine source characteristics of 1861 and 1907 quakes ; ( 5 ) model historical seismograms of large quakes on Sumatran fault ; ( 6 ) characterize aseismic strain events in 1861 , 1797 , and 1833 regions .
Collaborative Research Investigating the processes and timescales of andesite differentiation a comprehensive petrological and geochemical study of Arenal Volcano , Costa RicaEAR-0207185 ; EAR-0207287 ; EAR-0207761 ; EAR-0207316PIs Gill ; Reagan ; Tepley ; GardnerArenal Volcano in Costa Rica is an excellent natural laboratory in which to test specific hypotheses regarding differentiation mechanisms and the timescales of magmatic processes and their relationship to eruptions .
Our objective is to undertake a multi-pronged petrological and geochemical investigation to take advantage of existing data and models .
The on-going eruption of Arenal volcano has undergone complex changes in eruptive behavior , and a crucial question is whether those changes relate to different magma storage conditions , such as varying depths and hence initial volatile contents , or to different degassing styles and rates .
We will investigate this important issue through several techniques .
We seek to determine the timescales of degassing , the residence times and ascent rate of degassed magmas , and the timescales of degassing-induced plagioclase crystallization .
We will measure short-lived nuclides within the uranium decay series to constrain the timescales of magmatic processes as well as measure the long-lived isotopic compositions of whole rocks , and mineral separates and individual minerals in the case of Sr , to determine whether there is evidence for involvement of isotopically distinct components during differentiation processes .
Lastly , we will measure a suite of major- and trace-element concentrations to evaluate the secular change in Arenal lava composition.The data from these tests will help answer questions such as whether rates of differentiation depend on the depth and degree of crystallization and on the extent and character of degassing ; whether crystal and magma residence times can be as short as days to months during near steady-state eruptions of andesite ; whether within-eruption changes of magma composition are caused by open-system processes of fractional crystallization plus recharge or assimilation or both ; and whether eruption styles are related to degassing history and magma residence time .
ABSTRACT COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH -- LIFE HISTORY STRATEGIES , GROWTH RATES AND MICROSTRUCTURAL CHARACTEREVOLUTION ACROSS THE COELUROSAURIAN/AVIALAN TRANSITIONGregory M. Erickson .
Kristina Curry-Rogers , Mark Norell Birds ( avialan dinosaurs ) are unique among living animals in showing extremely rapid growth rates .
How they attained this capacity is unknown .
In our research we will reconstruct the growth of the earliest birds and their closest ancestors , the coelurosaurian dinosaurs .
We will do this by coupling age estimates ( garnered through growth line counts ) with size estimates for a diversity of fossil species .
From the results we will be able to quantitatively assess when and how avian growth rates were generated and determine whether the first birds were simply feathered dinosaurs or physiological equivalents to living species .
Aside from helping us to understand how the most speciose group of animals living in our world came to came to be , broader impacts of this research include 1 ) establishing a World Wide Web site from which the lay pubic and professions can learn about scientific research , 2 ) providing advanced scientific training to undergraduate and graduate students including those from underrepresented groups , and 3 ) providing material for our public and non-major collegiate lectures in paleontology .
The proposal is to establish a US-EU/DELOS working group on Digital Archiving and Preservation .
The working group will meet over the next year to discuss and evaluate fruitful joint activities and research paths for collaborative activities in this general topical area .
The EU component of the effort is funded and managed by the DELOS Forum , a major organizer of digital libraries research and planning activities in Europe .
DELOS receives support from the Information Societies Technologies ( IST ) 5th Framework Programme of the European Commission .
This effort continues the planning and assessment activities begun by an earlier NSF-EU working groups ' process .
In their final report An International Research Agenda for Digital Libraries , delivered in Brussels in October 1998 , increased levels of collaboration and interaction was seen as critical to building multi-lingual , multi-national digital libraries .
The objective of the new working groups , of which this is one , is to define a research agenda on a specific topic and identify areas and activities for cooperation between EU and US researchers .
The efforts of this particular group take the next step in the planning process by assessing future directions for research and resource development related to archiving and preservation of digital content .
FeinEAR-0207169In the proposed research program , we will use x-ray absorption spectroscopy ( XAS ) of natural and laboratory-generated samples to determine the importance of metal-bacteria adsorption in affecting the distribution of metal in bacteria-water-rock systems .
The overall objective of the research is to test whether surface complexation modeling can account for the observed metal distributions under a range of conditions and complexities .
Quantifying the effects of bacteria on adsorption reactions in water-rock systems has direct applications not only to contaminant transport modeling , but also to bioremediation engineering and to the understanding of bacterial pathogen mobility .
The proposed research will ultimately lead to more accurate predictions of the mobility of aqueous metals in contaminated groundwater systems.The proposed research will deliver three things 1 ) an understanding , provided by both XAS and bulk adsorption measurements , of whether bacterial surface adsorption of aqueous metal cations plays an important role in metal speciation in bacteria-bearing water-rock systems ; 2 ) a rigorous testing of whether surface complexation modeling can account for the metal distribution in those systems ; and 3 ) a test of whether natural populations of bacteria exhibit identical metal adsorption properties , as was suggested by the data of Yee and Fein ( 2001a , b ) .
The experimental results from this research not only will further our understanding of metal-bacteria interactions , but they will also significantly improve our ability to accurately model the effects of bacterial adsorption on the fate and mobility of heavy metals in realistic geologic systems .
The team of S. Burges and P. De Vries ( Univ .
of Washington ) and G. Parker ( Univ .
of Minnesota ) plan collaborative research into the mechanics of coarse bedload transport at the particle scale .
Gravel tracer particles are a convenient way to study the longitudinal travel and dispersion and vertical mixing of sediment in mountain rivers .
Field observations of tracer displacement have not yet , however , been linked comprehensively into the formal framework of sediment transport in rivers.The study will use experiments as a bridge between theoretical/numerical research and field-scale research to a ) develop formulations for distance moved , dispersion and mixing of tracers for unsteady flow , b ) link these formulations to mechanistic theories of bedload transport and c ) test and validate the results against field data taken to the standards needed to test theory and numerical predictions.The field research will be conducted in several streams in western Washington State .
The experimental research will be conducted at St. Anthony Falls Laboratory .
The Washington and Minnesota teams will collaborate on both efforts , with both sides contributing to the development of a predictive numerical model .
ReederEAR-0207756This research project will investigate the fundamental structural and coordinative aspects of metal sorption at the calcite-water interface .
The experimental approach will combine laboratory experiments in model systems with spectroscopic techniques to characterize the detailed coordination geometry of selected metal and metalloid species adsorbed on calcite .
Metals of interest include divalent lead and cadmium , selected trivalent rare-earth elements , and arsenate anions .
These species are important contaminants in soils , sediments , aquifers , and other near-surface environments .
One goal of the research is to determine the role of adsorption in controlling binding site preferences for minor element uptake by calcite during crystal growth .
Observations that non-octahedral surface complexes for Zn ( II ) and Cu ( II ) adsorbed on calcite result in preferential uptake on the less constrained of two binding sites , suggests that site preferences for other metals should also correlate with surface complex geometry .
The proposed research tests this hypothesis for selected metals ( Pb and Cd ) and provides structural information that can be used in predictive models .
A further goal of the research is to evaluate how adsorption complexes control the coordination of rare-earth elements following incorporation into calcite , where observations have shown differences in coordination number between light and heavy lanthanides .
The role of solution pH on the structure of surface complexes will also be evaluated in laboratory and spectroscopic studies .
Another component of the research project will identify the mechanism of adsorption of arsenate ions on calcite .
Arsenate , an important contaminant in some natural waters , shows similarities in behavior with phosphate .
The latter is a strong inhibitor of calcite surface reactivity , and its presence may reduce the ability of calcite to sorb and incorporate other impurity species .
The results of this aspect of the research will provide insight to the mechanism of surface inhibition as well as provide fundamental information about arsenate interactions with calcite.Results from this research project will contribute to a broader understanding of the molecular-scale processes that govern the distribution and behavior of geochemically and environmentally important elements in Earth 's near-surface environment .
The results of this work will also contribute to an understanding of ways in which the threat to society posed by metal contaminants can be reduced .
The creation of the supercontinent of Gondwana is one of the most significant geologic events in the history of our planet yet the processes that led to its formation are poorly understood .
In its predrift position near the dawn of the Cambrian , Madagascar was situated in the interior of Gondwana near the eastern edge of the East African Orogen ( EAO ) .
This orogen marks the join between East and West Gondwana , and it contains within it pieces of recycled continental crust , ophiolite , and island-arc and continental-arc terranes that formed within and marginal to the former Mozambique Ocean .
Madagascar is thus critically positioned to reveal three key and currently enigmatic features of the EAO essential for understanding the transformation from Rodinia to Gondwana ( 1 ) the nature of the volcanic terranes in the central part of the EAO and their possible extensions in Somalia , Ethiopia , and Rajasthan ( India ) ; ( 2 ) the chronology of terrane-suturing and continental collision events in the critical join between East and West Gondwana , and ; ( 3 ) the structure of the eastern part of the EAO in the key transitional area from dominantly terrane-accreted geology ( in the north ) to continental collision and crustal overthickening ( in the south ) .PI 's Tucker and Kusky propose to undertake a two-year structural and geochronologic investigation of the polydeforrned and metamorphosed Precambrian rocks of central Madagascar ( Itremo region ) .
Work in this area holds great promise for resolving two first-order geologic questions in the eastern part of the East African Orogen ( 1 ) What is the direction of early structural vergence ( nappe emplacement ) in the eastern part of the East African Orogen and what is the geometry of the superposed folds of central Madagascar ?
Is the structural vergence westerly or southwesterly , as has been recently proposed ( Raeollson 1997 , Fernandez et al .
in revision ) , or is it easterly or southeasterly as advocated by others ( Tucker et al .
1997 and in revision ; Collins et al .
2000 a , b ) ?
Are other solutions possible9 ( 2 ) When did Pan-African defon-nation and metamorphism begin in the southern part of the EAO .
Were the nappes of central Madagascar initially transported and metamorphosed prior to -800 Ma ( Cox et al .
1998 ; Collins et al .
2000 a , b ; Hulscher et al 2001 ) ?
Alternatively , were they emplaced and metamorphosed after -800 Ma ( Tucker et al .
1997 , and in revison ; Fernandez et al .
in revision ; Cox et al .
2001 ) .
These questions are central to understanding the timing and geometry of plate convergence within the EAO .
The Itremo region of central Madagascar is the best place to study and address these issues it is situated within the region of Neoproterozoic overprinting , only - 1 50 km from the proposed suture with East Gondwana ; bedrock exposure is superb and the contrasting rock types permit accurate mapping of folds and faults ; stratigraphic facing directions are abundant and hence the inverted limbs of recumbent folds and thrust nappes can be readily identified , and ; reliable cross-sections may be constructed owing to the consistent regional plunge of the youngest-generation folds.Research will proceed through an integrated program of geologic mapping , structural analysis , I I and U-Pb geochronology .
Structural investigations and sample collections will be made in three key areas within the Itremo region , tentatively identified as comprising the inverted limbs of large-scale east-directed fold- or thrust-nappes ( Tucker et al .
in revision ) .
Stratigraphic analysis , structural investigations and detailed mapping projects are designed to test our structural hypothesis and increase our knowledge of the regional geometry of the folds and faults .
U-Pb geochronology of key samples will constrain the age of nappe emplacement and regional metamorphism , and provide a critical test of our collision model .
This work will lead to a new understanding of the kinematics , age and overall structural vergence in the critical , eastern part of the EAO where strongly divergent views of its evolution arc emerging .
Research will involve collaboration between professional colleagues in Madagascar and the U.S. , and allow for the participation and training of American and Malagasy students in field- and laboratory-based research .
EAR-0207372 SEISMIC TRENCHING FOR THE PULSE OF THE EARTHQUAKEENGINERonald L. Bruhn and Gerard SchusterDepartment of Geology and GeophysicsUniversity of UtahSalt Lake City , UT 84112-01 11PROJECT ABSTRACTThe purpose of this research project is to study how earthquakes occur on normal faults .
The patterns of earthquake recurrence in space and time provide the 'pulse ' of the earthquake engine .
Investigating these patterns is revealing the complex processes that interact to generate earthquakes within the earth .
Successfully understanding the nature of past heartbeats is the key to predicting the future behavior of large faults that generate earthquakes.Until now , trenching across fault scarps has been the primary tool for revealing the past history of earthquakes .
By carefully logging the sedimentary deposits in trenches , geologists have been successful in deducing the sizes and recurrence intervals of past earthquakes .
However , there are three shortcomings with the trenching method it is expensive and environmentally intrusive , it is limited to depths no deeper than about 30 feet , and yields only a vei7tical cross-section of the fault .
These limitations mean that the earthquake heartbeat is poorly sampled in both space and time , which can lead to erroneous conclusions about the nature of earthquakes .
To overcome these problems , and to answer fundamental questions about the heartbeat of normal faulting , University of Utah earth scientists are conducting more than two dozen shallow seismic experiments over fault scarps in the Oquirrh , Stansbury and Wasatch faults .
These are three large normal fault zones located in the Wasatch Front of Utah .
The first arrival times of the recorded seismic waves yield velocity tomograms , or images , that delineate both the shallow and deep patterns of sedimentary 'colluvial ' wedges that formed in response to the offset of the earth 's surface during past earthquakes .
When identified , the colluvial wedges to a depth of 50 m or so are cored by a powerful Odex drill , and samples of the deposits surrounding and within the wedges are dated by a variety of dating methods .
By this procedure the science team is extending our knowledge of earthquake behavior beyond 100,000 years , and significantly extending the history of earthquakes along the Wasatch Fault and other faults in the eastern Basin and Range Province .
This combined use of seismic tomography , drilling and dating methods is referred to as seismic trenching.The extended earthquake history being determined during this study provides new information for predicting the future history of earthquakes in the region , and for creating a new generation of mechanical models of processes of faulting .
The research has significant impact on the applied field of earthquake hazards and the basic science of earthquake mechanics .
The PI 's propose to employ recent advancements in geochronometric techniques to refine their understanding and models of the Proterozoic geology of the southern Lake Superior region .
Their objectives are two-fold 1 ) to use U-Pb monazite geochronometry ( both ion probe and EMP ) to document and directly date Penokean and subsequent metamorphic events ( i.e. , Yavapai , Mazatzal and Wolf River metamorphism ) in an attempt to link these episodes to continued subduction after the Penokean orogeny ; and 2 ) to use Ar-Ar laser microprobe grain-scale age mapping to evaluate the influence of multiple crustal events on the regional thermal record .
Their results will be used ultimately to establish the Proterozoic geology of this historical region in the context of a long-lived convergent orogen model ( Karlstrom et al. , 2001 ) .Metamorphic geochronometry .
Results of recent NSF-supported research ( Holm and VanSchmus ) on the origin of post-Penokean granites show that magmatism long thought to be solely1760 Ma , actually occurred in three separate , generally southeastward-migrating pulses at 1800,1775 , and 1750 Ma .
Van Schmus , Holm and their co-authors have postulated that thesemagmatic pulses could correlate with northward-directed subduction associated with southwardgrowth of the continent .
In one possible scenario , geon 17 Yavapai-age slab rollback of anorthward subducting oceanic plate caused continental arc magmatism to step generallysoutheastward between 1800 and 1750 Ma .
As the slab steepened , it would have disengagedfrom the overlying , overthickened crust .
The reduced compressional stresses and increasedthermal input allowed for extensional collapse of the orogen and subsequent but short-livedcrustal stabilization .
The PI 's propose to carry out a detailed metamorphic study to test the hypothesis that widespread metamorphism ( and not simply widespread cooling ) occurred with the migrating arc magmatism and might be linked spatially to tectonic extrusion ( i.e. , collapse ) structures .
Their preliminary SHRIMP and EMP dating of metamorphic monazites appear to support this .
These data will provide the first direct timing constraints on both Penokean and post-Penokean metamorphism in the southern Lake Superior region.Metamorphic thermochronometry .
In the 1990 's , NSF-funded ( Holm ) Ar-Ar mineral age datawere used to document the timing and extent of orogenic cooling and later thermal reheatingacross the Penokean orogen .
For instance , abundant 1760-1720 Ma plateau cooling ages areinterpreted to be associated with a rapid crustal collapse/stabilization period and 1630-1600 Maplateau ages are interpreted to indicate reheating/deformation associated with the Matzatalorogeny to the south .
However , preliminary Ar-ion laser microprobe age data documents thepresence of significant age gradients across muscovite crystals ( 500 m.y .
in one case ) .
Theseresults merit further scrutiny of the existing thermochronologic data .
Specifically , do the 1630-1600 Ma Ar-Ar plateau ages i ) reflect the time of widespread deformation and mild reheating ; ii ) represent partial resetting associated with geon 14 magmatism ; iii ) or perhaps represent slowcooling ?
Ar-Ar muscovite laser probe age mapping will allow the PI 's to better constrain the medium-temperature history of the region and , especially to relate it to younger overprinting events in the thermally reheated areas .
The data collected in this study are critical to properly interpret the new igneous ages ( obtained by Van Schmus , Holm , and others ) and existing Ar-Ar ages and to evaluate the Proterozoic geology of southern Lake Superior region in the context of a long-lived convergent orogen model .
Willson0207788This collaborative research proposal aims to combine high-resolution tomographic datasets with state-of-the-art pore-scale modeling techniques to investigate the flow and entrapment of nonaqueous phase liquids ( NAPLs ) .
We will focus on mixed-wettability systems and the impact of geometric descriptors and anisotropy on multiphase flow .
Synchrotron microtomography stations at Center for Advanced Microstructures and Devices at Louisiana State University and the Advanced Photon Source at Argonne National Laboratory will be used to capture highly resolved images from multiphase porous medium experiments .
In addition to capturing the morphological structure of these systems , pore-scale properties ( e.g. , pore body/throat distribution and correlation , tortuosity , connectivity , etc ... ) can be calculated from these images .
Researchers at the Johns Hopkins University will use the data and results from these experiments to extend their pore-morphological approaches to model imbibition .
LB methods will be used to accurately model various aspects of multiphase flow including thick wetting phase films in strongly water-wet systems , heterogeneous wettability , and anisotropic spatial correlations of the pore space .
The collapse of the WTC Towers and destruction of surrounding buildings were accompanied by damage to underground water distribution , electric power , natural gas , steam , wastewater conveyance , telecommunication , and transportation systems .
This research aims to investigate and model complex system response , involving underground facilities that are often taken for granted or overlooked in comprehensive emergency planning .
Understanding and documenting how underground infrastructure performs during extreme events is a necessary step for increasing the resilience of urban utility and transportation networks .
This research will strive to extend the knowledge gained to understand the interdependencies of underground infrastructure and improve their security in future extreme events .
In addition to investigating integrated system response in New York , the research will compare the effects of intense localized damage at WTC with infrastructure system performance affected by distributed damage during major California earthquakes .
Response during extreme events will be compared with the effects of previous severe accidents in New York .
Three activities are involved 1 ) data collection and interviews with system managers ; 2 ) comparative analysis ; and 3 ) methodology for assessing interdependencies .
Some of this work has already begun .
Deliverables include recommendations for developing a methodology to evaluate the damage , areas of greatest vulnerability , and the possibilities of cascading damage .
Eventually , a methodology will be sought that adapts risk management techniques used in industrial process control to decision support systems for civil infrastructure managers .
0207658KringThe International Continental Scientific Drilling Program ( ICDP ) is funding the drilling of a 2km hole in the Chicxulub impact crater on the Yucatan Peninsula in Mexico .
NSF is funding US investigators to analyze core samples from the Chicxulub Scientific Drilling Project ( CSDP ) .
The Chicxulub crater is one of the world 's largest impact craters and has been linked to the mass extnction event at the Cretaceous - Tertiary ( K/T ) boundary ~65 million years ago .
As part of the CSDP Science Team , the PIs will provide a general description of the core for the broader scientific community , so that they can request appropriate samples for their studies .
They will also provide an initial set of detailed analyses to characterize the impact lithologies in the core to better understand the formation of the Chicxulub crater , its thermal evolution as it cooled over a period of ~100,000 years , and the consequences it may have had for the environment .
The project will include petrographic , chemical , and isotopic analyses of surviving target lithologies and shock-metamorphosed products of the impact event .
*** Abstract Much of the current understanding of the geodynamics of the Indo-Asian collision has been based on two end-member models the plane-stress viscous thin-sheet model based on continuum mechanics , and the plane-strain plasticine indentation model based on analog experiments .
Both models have provided important frameworks for understanding the Tibetan tectonics , but the two-dimensionality and other simplifications of these models have left many important issues in uncertainty .
For example , the plasticine indentation model predicts lateral extrusion of Tibet and SE Asia to be the dominant mechanism accommodating the > 2000 km post-collisional crustal shortening , whereas the viscous thin-sheet model emphasizes the role of crustal thickening .
These different predictions are biased by the model limitations the plasticine indentation model does not allow vertical strain and hence crustal thickening , whereas the viscous thin-sheet model dose not includes the faults and the frictional ( plastic ) rheology necessary to simulate the escaping tectonics .
Since these end-member models were introduced ~20 years ago , numerous improvements have been made , but the continued debate on the strain partitioning between crustal thickening and lateral extrusion and many other questions manifests the need for a new approach .
The proposed work is to develop a fully three-dimensional ( 3-D ) finite element model to investigate the rise and fall of the Himalayan-Tibetan plateau .
The large volume of multidisciplinary observational data accumulated from decades of intensive studies is ready to be integrated and interpreted in more sophisticated geodynamic models .
The 3-D finite element models are now feasible thanks to the advancement of computer technology and maturation of the finite element method .
The PI has already built the prototype 3-D model and successful applied it to studies of active tectonics in the Tibetan plateau and the Andes .
Major model developments in this project include implementing strike-slip faults in finite-strain calculations and incorporating more realistic rheology .
The finite-strain model will include brittledeformation within the upper crust , often omitted in viscous thin-sheet models , by using a mixed viscous-elastic rheology .
Transient stress and strain rates will be simulated in infinitesimal-strain models with viscoealstic and plasto-viscoelastic rheology .
The finite-strain and infinitesimal-strain models will be combined to provide a more complete simulations of the collision history .
Systematic numerical experiments will be conducted to explore the mechanics of the Indo-Asian collision .
The results will lead to a better understanding of these questions What are the major driving forces for crustal deformation in the Himalayan-Tibetan plateau ?
When and how did the Tibetan plateau uplift ?
What controlled the strain partitioning between crustal thickening and lateral extrusion ?
What caused the Tibetan extension ?
How is the upper crustal deformation related to that in the lower crust and the mantle lithosphere ?
The numerical modeling will be closely integrated with ongoing geological and geophysical studies in the Tibetan plateau through collaboration with US and Chinese scientists , including Yin ( UCLA ) , Nabelek ( Oregon State ) , and Flower ( UIC ) .
The proposed 3-D finite element models will be a major step forward in numerical modeling of large-scale continental deformation and can be used for other plate boundaries .
The PI will document the computer codes and make them available to public .
The multidisciplinary data sets compiled for this study will be organized into a GIS database and made available to the research community .
This project will involve undergraduate and graduate students ; the integration of cutting-edge computation with multidisciplinary studies provides a great opportunity for training a new generation of geoscience students .
MODELING MAGMA DYNAMICS AND DEGASSING IN VOLCANIC ERUPTIONS EAR-0207821PIs Proussevitch & SahagianThe primary goal of this project is to develop a mathematical analysis and computer model of the movement of magma within volcanoes .
Eruptions are normally driven by the growth of gas bubbles that come out of solution in the magma due to reductions in pressure before and during magma ascent within the volcano .
The project consists of two parts .
The first is a mathematical and computer analysis of volcanic eruption processes .
The second is a sensitivity analysis to determine how the model system responds to variations in each of a number of attributes of the volcanic system .
This should elucidate the roles and relative importance of all relevant factors in driving volcanic eruptions .
The numerical model will enable us to explore the interaction of magma ascent , bubble growth , bubble size distribution , temperature change , and other specific volcanic processes .
The proposed model is not intended to simulate specific natural eruptions .
Rather , the results of the model and sensitivity study should lead to a better understanding of the mechanisms by which bubble growth drives eruptions , and an understanding of how magmatic conditions , properties , and conduit geometry affect the style of volcanic eruptions .
This will set the stage for determining the conditions under which to expect explosive volcanic eruptions and their related volcanic hazards .
This work is a collaborative effort to study the transformation and removal of ozone and fine particles in the air due to multiphase atmospheric chemistry related to aerosol acidity .
The chemical measurements made will augment the planned 'core ' measurements obtaining during the Atmospheric Investigation , Regional Modeling , Analysis and Prediction ( AIRMAP ) program field intensive scheduled for July and August 2002 .
The objective of these additional measurements is to assess the significance of pH-dependent , gas-particle interactions with respect to the cycling of odd nitrogen , sulfur and other chemical species in the Gulf of Maine boundary layer .
This work contributes to interagency collaboration in aerosol science between NSF and NOAA .
This grant supports an interdisciplinary research project in applied and computational seismology between the Physics and Mathematics Departments at North Carolina A & T State University .
Specifically , the PI will spend one year working in the Seismic Physical Modeling and Data Processing Laboratories in the Physics Department to gain physical insight into and knowledge of seismic data acquisition , processing , advanced imaging and visualization , and to study mathematical methods and open problems in seismic data analysis .
The proposed project activities include ( 1 ) acquiring seismic data through seismic physical modeling as well as field surveying ; ( 2 ) processing acquired seismic data using OMEGA Seismic Processing System and Seismic Unix software packages ; ( 3 ) simulating seismic data through mathematical modeling and numerical solutions of appropriately formulated two- and three-dimensional point source acoustic wave equations for seismic waves , and writing interactive Fortran , C++ , Labview , Matlab , OMEGA , and Seismic Unix programming scripts ; and ( 4 ) studying mathematical methods , current research trend and open problems in seismic data analysis .
It is anticipated that upon completion of his one-year residence in the Physics Department , the PI will not only enhance his own expertise and experience in applied and computational seismology , but also lay a foundation for a continuing collaboration between the PI and his two hosts in the Physics Department in developing a well-defined interdisciplinary geosciences research program which will engage other mathematics faculty members and students .
The proposed project activities will also further collaborations and cooperation with the Allied Geophysical Laboratories of the University of Houston , Western Geophysical/Baker Hughes Corporation , and Pyramid Environmental , Inc. as well as enhance and expand the geophysical and environmental science education and research training component of the Talent-21 project funded by the NSF HBCU-UP .
This project will have immediate impact on three proposed program initiatives at the proposers ' institution a computational science program , a geosciences program , and an interdisciplinary Ph.D. program , all of which aim at strengthening and upgrading the University 's interdisciplinary research efforts .
This IGMS project is jointly supported by the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities ( OMA ) and the Division of Mathematical Sciences ( DMS ) .
0207439Miller The Rio Pilcomayo heads on the Cerro Rico de Potosi precious metal-polymetallic tin deposits of Bolivia .
Mining of the Potosi deposits was initiated by the Spanish in 1545 and has continued without interruption to the present .
Our previous studies have demonstrated that the release of mining and milling wastes to the environment during the past 450 years has resulted in extensive contamination of water and sediments of the upper Pilcomayo valley .
The primary objective of this investigation is to determine if Pb isotopes can be effectively used in a large river system to quantify the decadal scale transport and storage of contaminated debris from mining operations .
Inherent in the study is an analysis of the linkages between geomorphic processes and the long-term dispersal of contaminated materials.To accomplish the project objectives several tasks will be completed ( 1 ) Pb sources within the upper reaches of Rio Pilcomayo basin will be identified and characterized in terms of their geographical distribution and Pb isotopic signatures .
This step will involve the collection and analysis of ore samples from Cerro Rico , the major bedrock units that underlie the watershed , mineralized zones within tributary basins , and channel bed sediments within major tributaries ; ( 2 ) the alluvial stratigraphy and geomorphology of the tributary basins will be documented and linked to the existing geomorphic-stratigraphic data on the Rio Pilcomayo to ( a ) refine our understanding of the timing , magnitude , and nature of historic geomorphic events that have occurred along the Rio Pilcomayo , and ( b ) gain insights into the timing and magnitude of sediment influx to the Rio Pilcomayo from tributaries ( both of which are believed to have had an impact on the downstream movement of contaminated sediment ) ; ( 3 ) spatial variations in the total concentration of selected metals and Pb isotopic ratios will be documented perpendicular to flow , downstream , and vertically within age-constrained alluvial deposits .
Emphasis will be placed on the analysis of 1.5-2 m long cores extracted from contaminated alluvial terraces composed of vertically accreted flood deposits ; and ( 4 ) sediment mixing models will be used to quantify the relative proportion of Pb in alluvial deposits that is derived from each of the delineated Pb sources .
Experts continue to decry the poor performance of American children on standardized mathematics tests .
Hundreds of studies have investigated mathematics learning in the formal setting of the school , including analyses of teacher-student interactions and best methods for teachers to use in instruction .
In contrast , informal mathematics learning in the home has received little research attention , and direct analyses of parent-child interactions involving math problems have seldom been attempted .
The primary purpose of the proposed research is to study mothers as they help their 5th and 7th grade children with math problems .
The researchers developed a standardized mathematics task that can be administered in the home using a laptop computer .
Mother-child interactions will be videotaped and coded .
The approach is based on cognitive social learning theory and Vygotsky 's premise that the child 's intellectual development is heavily rooted in the child 's social environment , or what Rogoff calls an apprenticeship in thinking .
The primary goal of this project is to test the idea that macroevolutionary parameters might be fairly general among larger groups .
Bellerophontiform molluscs share numerous shell characters with contemporaneous gastropods even though bellerophonts are bilaterally symmetrical whereas early gastropods are asymmetrical .
Workers consider many of these features to have similar biological implications for both bellerophonts and asymmetrical gastropods .
If so , then PI expects to see similar rates of change in those characters as well as similar driven trends ( i.e. , biased productions of particular character states ) .
He will evaluate alternative hypotheses using likelihood approaches designed by the author to simultaneously test phylogenetic and character evolution parameters .
In doing so , tests will assess whether character parameters for bellerophonts are significantly different than for asymmetrical gastropods and , if so , in what ways .
A secondary goal of the study is to test basic ideas about bellerophont relationships , such as whether they are monophyletic or polyphyletic , and ideas about how closely related bellerophonts are to asymmetrical snails .
Archaeological research around the globe has long been focused on the grand monuments , fine artistic achievements and sweeping political dramas of ancient peoples .
This emphasis has often been adopted at the expense of a smaller scale , more intimate understanding of the lives and experiences of the individual peoples comprising those cultures .
A consideration of how ancient peoples perceived and identified themselves with respect to those within and without their communities will provide an important step in improving our anthropological understanding of personal and group identity in both the past and present .
This research project addresses issues of co mmunity identity and its material expression on range of scales among the Late Classic ( 650-900 A.D. ) peoples of Las Canoas , NW Honduras .
Research includes the intensive excavation of both elite and non-elite houses and administrative/ritual buildings at the archaeological site of Las Canoas , as well as analysis of artifacts recovered from those structures .
This information will be studied with the aim of finding patterns in the use of built spaces and the production , trade , and use of material goods , such as pottery .
The design of human settlements and the changes wrought on them over time lends insight into the ways people feel their environment should be organized and communities experienced .
The types of possessions made , gathered , saved , displayed , hidden , and/or discarded by individuals and families reveals much about what they value , what they are able to acquire and to what lengths they will go to access such items .
Studies of both ancient architecture and artifact assemblages including pottery , stone tools , domestic refuse , burials , special caches and/or ritual deposits provide a view into how a group of people shaped , lived in , and gave meaning to their world - in essence created their identities .
The proposed research will consider the layout , orientation and relationships of buildings to one another , as well as the types and styles of artifacts ( especially pottery ) , as indicators or expressions of individual and community identity .
Information recovered from Las Canoas will be analyzed with these ideas in mind and then compared to that known from contemporaneous , similarly sized sites in the surrounding area .
Understanding how the peoples living at Las Canoas related to the social , political , and economic hierarchy in Late Classic Mesoamerica are basic goals of this project .
The broader aim of the research , however , is to test the hypothesis that much-debated anthropological concepts such as culture and ethnicity do not always play themselves out in the daily reality of human lives .
Rather , it is proposed that peoples craft their identities to suit a variety of material and symbolic needs , shifting their alliances and affiliations in response to changing pressures and situations .
This research is designed to question our often-untested assumptions about the nature of interaction between different peoples and communities in achieve a better understanding of human behavior .
Understanding Archean crustal and mantle evolution hinges upon proper identification and characterization of oceanic lithosphere .
The PI has discovered and reported a complete , albeit slightly dismembered and metamorphosed , Archean ophiolite sequence in the North China Craton .
The top of the ophiolitic succession is marked by sulfide-rich chert and banded iron fon-nation overlying several tens-to one hundred meters of variably deformed pillow lavas .
These grade down through a mixed dike/pillow lava section into a 2 km thick I 00 % sheeted dike complex mapped continuously for more than 5 km along strike ; reconnaissance mapping suggests that the dike complex may extend for more than 20 km .
The dikes consist of diabase , basalt and hb-pyx-gabbro .
Most have chilled margins developed on their NE sides , but not their SW sides , indicating one-way chilling .
The sheeted dike complex is underlain by several km of mixed isotropic and foliated gabbro , which develop compositional layering approximately 2 km below the sheeted dikes , and then over several hundred meters merge into strongly compositionally layered gabbro and olivine-gabbro .
The layered gabbro becomes mixed with layered pyroxenite/gabbro marking a transition zone that grades into cumulate ultramafic rocks including dunite , pyroxenite and wehrlite , and finally into strongly defon-fied and serpentinized olivine and orthopyroxene-bearing ultramafic rocks that may be depleted mantle harzburgite tectonites .
The PI has obtained a U/Pb zircon age of 2.505 Ga from gabbro of the Dongwanzi ophiolite , making it the world s oldest recognized , laterally- extensive complete ophiolite sequence .
Study of this remarkable ophiolite may offer the best constraints yet on the nature of the Archean oceanic crust and mantle , and offer insights to the style of Archean plate tectonics and global heat loss mechanisms .
The Dongwanzi ophiolite is one of the largest well-preserved greenstone belts in the Zunhua structural belt ( part of the Central orogenic belt ) , that divides the North China craton into eastern and western blocks .
More than I 000 other fragments of gabbro , pillow lava , sheeted dikes , harzburgite , and podifonn-chromite bearing dunite occur as tectonic blocks in a blotite- gneiss matrix in the Zunhua structural belt .
The PI interprets these rocks as an Archean ophiolitic melange and recognize that some of the blocks preserve deeper levels of oceanic mantle than the Dongwanzi ophiolite .
The PI and co-workers have designed a comprehensive series of studies to fully document the field , structural , geochronological , mineralogical , and chemical characteristics of this ophiolite and related melange .
They will assess what these data mean in ten-ns of Archean crustal and mantle evolution , thermal state of the early Earth , and ideas about Precambrian plate tectonics .
They regard this as an unsurpassed opportunity to evaluate fundamental properties of Archean crust and mantle , and to understand processes critical for evaluating Archean oceanic crustal and mantle evolution .
Understanding Archean oceanic processes in the North China craton will provide a valuable contrast with similar processes recorded in younger ophiolites , indicating how mid-ocean ridge processes may have evolved from a period of high heat production to one of lower heat production .
Detailed mapping will accurately delineate the extent , thickness , and relationships between individual units , which is important for understanding mechanisms of Archean sea floor spreading and heat loss .
Structural analysis of mantle tectonites will reveal deformation conditions in the Archean oceanic mantle .
U/Pb geochronology will be used to establish the age and duration of magmatism represented in the ophiolite and document the structural chronology by dating igneous dikes and plutons that intruded between different events , as deten-nined by mapping .
Geochemical analyses will be aimed at determining relationships between the crustal and depleted mantle components of the ophiolite , and comparing these data with younger ophiolites from different tectonic settings , and also from Archean greenstone belts , some of which may include severely dismembered Archean ophiolite fragments .
Analyses will include major , minor , trace , REE , and several isotopic systems ( in collaboration with geochemists from several cooperating institutions ) and will be used to assess crustal and mantle evolution .
Archean oceanic lithospheric structure is likely to have been as complex and variable as that in the present-day plate mosaic .
Documentation of the characteristics of the Dongwanzi ophiolite and related rocks may serve as the first reference column for Archean oceanic lithosphere , since it is the most complete Archean ophiolite known on the planet .
WysessionEAR-0207751 The aim of this project is to advance our understanding of the geophysics of the Core-mantle boundary ( CMB ) region through examination of small-scale regional variations in shear waves that interact with D , the base of the mantle .
Specifically , the investigators will look for direct evidence of the foundations of mantle plumes , chemical boundary layers , and subducted slabs at the CMB with the increased resolution provided by the growing database of broadband array data .
The CMB displays complexity and variability unequalled within the sub-lithospheric earth .
As a major chemical and thermal boundary layer between the rocky mantle and liquid outer core , the CMB likely plays significant roles in the circulation of mass , as well as the transfer of heat both within and between the mantle and core .
The investigators will specifically address the following questions 1 ) Do mantle plumes form in D ?
2 ) Are there laterally discrete chemical boundary layers within D ?
3 ) Do slabs reach the CMB ?
One-dimensional models of D structure will be generated using reflectivity synthetics , but final models will also be tested with fully 3D synthetics using the spectral-element method of Komatitsch and Tromp ( 2001 ) , which has been installed on Washington University 's SGI parallel processing machine .
The objective of the proposed research is to improve network security through an innovative approach to vulnerability and resiliency analysis .
Even well administered networks are vulnerable to attacks due to the security ramifications of offering a variety of combined services .
That is , services that are secure when offered in isolation nonetheless provide an attacker with combined vulnerabilities to exploit when offered simultaneously .
Security tools such as COPS , System Scanner , and CyberCop , are excellent at identifying specific , known , individual host vulnerabilities in services , software packages , and configurations .
What these methods do not address is the compound effect of multiple vulnerabilities .
The result is a serious problem because interactions between vulnerabilities can easily cascade across a network .
The risk posed by each vulnerability may be judged either necessary or acceptable in isolation , but the combination of these vulnerabilities can still turn out to compromise the network as a whole in an unacceptable way .
A limited amount of existing work in vulnerability analysis addresses this problem , but the existing work falls short in three key areas , namely resiliency analysis , all-paths analysis , and inference engine analysis .
The proposed work will improve network security by addressing systematically each of these three areas .
Proposal ID DMS-0208301International Conference inReliability and Survival Analysis 2003 ( PI Edsel Pena , Ph.D. ; Co-PIs James Lynch , Ph.D. , William Padgett , Ph .
D. ) AbstractThe Department of Statistics , and its Center for Reliability and Quality Sciences , at the University of South Carolina in Columbia will organize the International Conference on Reliability and Survival Analysis 2003 ( ICRSA2003 ) to be held on the University 's historic campus from May 21-24 , 2003 .
The objectives of this conference are to bring together senior and established researchers and young and promising researchers from around the world who are working in the theoretical and applied aspects of reliability , survival analysis , and related topics in order to share recent advances and current research , as well as future research trends , in these areas .
Through this conference , it is expected that interaction and/or collaborative work among reliability and survival analysis researchers will be fostered , which will enhance and accelerate developments in both areas .
As it currently exists , the reliability and survival analysis disciplines have developed somewhat separately , but there is much to be gained by recognizing similarities between them since both deal with the stochastic modeling and statistical analysis of failure-time data , usually in the presence of incomplete information .
This conference , which will be the first since 1998 to be held in the United States focused simultaneously on reliability and survival analysis , will enable many researchers in the United States to participate , especially new researchers and graduate students , as the cost and accessibility for participation is more viable .
Plenary talks and invited talks will be given by leading researchers in reliability and survival analysis , and contributed talks and poster sessions will be solicited from advanced graduate students and new researchers , especially from under-represented groups .
The funding provided by the National Science Foundation will enable partial financial support of the plenary speakers , new researchers , and graduate students .
New researchers and graduate students from under-represented groups will be particularly encouraged to seek funding from this NSF support .
This project is to develop enabling techniques for a large-scalemetasearch engine that aims at covering a much larger portion of theWeb and at the same time retrieving more up-to-date and more usefuldocuments than existing search engines and metasearch engines .
Ametasearch engine is a system that supports unified access to multipleexisting search engines .
It is estimated that there are hundreds ofthousands of search engines on the Web ( including deep Web ) .
Theproposed metasearch engine ( WebScales ) will attempt to connect toas many of these search engines as possible .
The focus of the researchis on advancing highly scalable distributed information retrievaltechnology and the research issues to be investigated in this project include ( 1 ) how to discover these search engines automatically , ( 2 ) how to incorporate them into the proposed metasearch engine automatically , ( 3 ) how to identify potentially useful search engines to use for any given user query submitted to the metasearch engine , and ( 4 ) how to achieve high retrieval effectiveness .
This project will determine a well-defined set of rules for identifying periods of Steady Magnetospheric Convection ( SMC ) .
An automated procedure will be established to go through a large database of satellite and ground-based data to identify SMC periods .
Once a database of SMC periods had been generated the project will then utilize that database to perform statistical analyses on the conditions under which SMCs arise .
If a clear set of solar wind and magnetospheric conditions can be identified as the generators of SMCs , an expert system will then be developed for making for detailed nowcasts and forecasts of space weather .
Biswas , GautamCCR-0208799Embedded systems , which include software components integrated into physical processes , are per-vading all aspects of our daily lives from home appliances to safety-critical systems , such as aircraft and nuclear plants .
The widespread use necessitates the development of new engineering tech-niques that can ensure their timely and assured development , accurate monitoring during operation , and robust control , to ensure safety and reliability .
This project develops an integrated model-based approach to embedded system development that includes the plant , its environment , and the embed-ded computing system .
The models provide a common framework for design and run-time analyses of system stability , liveliness , safety , security , and real-time supervisory control .
Models can also form the basis for generating the hardware and software components of the embedded systems , and de-fining their run-time configurations .
This generative aspect of modeling is a very relevant and distin-guishing property of the model-based development process .
Further , the ability to analyze system behavior at run-time forms the basis for methodologies designed to accommodate deviations caused by disturbances and unexpected changes in the environment .
The goal is to ensure that the system and its surroundings are not harmed when aberrant situations occur.The project will develop technologies for run-time analysis of embedded systems that alleviate some of the complexities of modeling and analysis of systems with large mode spaces .
Specifically , effec-tive methodologies that address run-time dynamic analysis issues are addressed .
This includes three primary tasksDeveloping a new concept called the dynamic hybrid automaton ( DHA ) for embedded sys-tems models with large mode spaces .
A DHA is simply a hybrid automaton , which can be constructed incrementally , on-the-fly , at run-time , as system behavior evolves .
It is based on formal compositional modeling techniques in the hybrid automata framework that ensure model construction grows linearly ( as opposed to exponentially ) as a function of the number of switching elements in the hybrid model .
Tracking system behavior using hybrid observers developed from the hybrid automata mod-els .
This involves techniques for updating the models of the observer on-line when a mode change is detected while tracking the plant behavior .
Research challenges focus on model and tracking procedures that minimize mistracking at mode transition boundaries , and devel-oping code generation systems that allow for incremental recalculation of the observer mod-els while satisfying hard time bounds on the generation process , and Synthesizing supervisory controllers on-line in response to mode changes , some of which may be attributed to disturbances and unexpected changes in the environment .
A new con-cept , the Active Controller Model ( ACM ) , is proposed .
The ACM is a dynamic data structure that explicitly represents the currently active supervisory controller ( SVC ) , together with its generator and actuator .
The SVC can be implemented as a generic procedure that uses the ACM as its knowledge base to compute what control actions to take .
When the plant model changes , the ACM is updated to address the new situation .
This will involve a number of in-novative research tasks , such as developing an expressive language to describe control ob-jectives , definition and incremental update procedures for the ACM models , and anytime re-source-bound algorithms for synthesizing supervisory controller code on-line .
Robust super-visory controllers will extend the concept of adaptive control into the hybrid-systems domain , and adjust to configuration changes in the plant and environment .
The success of all three components of this project is very heavily dependent on handling computa-tional complexity issues in incremental model generation , code generation for the hybrid observer , and on-line supervisory controller synthesis based on desired objectives for the plant .
Therefore , complexity studies of the synthesis and code generation algorithms is an important component of the project .
The goals are ambitious , but the success of these methods will offer new flexibility in embed-ded applications while addressing issues of reliability and safety during run-time operation .
The research goals of this project are ( 1 ) to determine how the metacognitively-focused instructional tool called the Model-Observe-Reflect-Explain ( MORE ) Thinking Frame can be used in both high school and college chemistry laboratory courses to enhance metacognition , understanding , and problem solving , ( 2 ) to investigate how instructor professional development experiences can be designed to sustain the effective use of the MORE Thinking Frame , as well as specifically what instructors learn from such experiences , and ( 3 ) to augment and refine the model of how people use their metacognitive skills in the contexts of chemistry learning , problem solving , and instructor professional development .
Design experiments will be employed to study the complex and dynamic interplay between instructor and student cognition ( understanding , beliefs , metacognition ) ; instructor professional development experiences ; and classroom practices of communities of learners using the MORE Thinking Frame as instructional and professional development designs are simultaneously refined .
Throughout the course of the project , a sequence of instructional and curricular developments that centrally involve the Model-Observe-Reflect-Explain ( MORE ) Thinking Frame will be implemented , studied , and refined .
During the first year of the project , high school and college instructors will collaborate with the developers of the MORE Thinking Frame to learn about , adapt , and implement the MORE Frame in their own laboratory courses ( without changing the experiments used in their existing curricula ) .
In the second and third years of the project , the project team ( including many of these instructors ) will design problem-based laboratory modules to complement the use of the MORE Thinking Frame and to infuse more authentic inquiry into the chemistry laboratory courses.Throughout the professional development experiences and successive implementations of the MORE Frame in various instructors ' classrooms , data will be collected from a broad range of sources ( both qualitative and quantitative ) and analyzed to address the research questions and to inform future practice .
In addition , a website will be constructed to provide information and support for implementing MORE curricula and instruction as well as to provide instructional materials for the problem-based modules developed .
Finally , the project team will conduct workshops to disseminate information and materials .
This project will generate new knowledge about how metacognitively-focused instructional tools can be used to enhance students ' science learning in various instructional contexts ; how to structure effective professional development experiences and what instructors learn from such experiences ; how laboratory teaching practices are linked to students ' chemistry learning ; and the relationships among metacognition , chemistry teaching , and chemistry learning .
The project will conduct research in the following topicsThe design , implementation and testing of scalable method that uses self-similarity to cluster numerical data sets.The design , implementation and testing of a scalable method that uses entropy to cluster categorical data sets , based on the notion entropy.The design , implementation of testing of a scalable method of clustering mixed data sets.The research will have an impact on the following applications.Projective clustering The project aim to use a combination of a clustering algorithms and singular value decomposition to discover the dimensions that are most relevant to each cluster in high dimensional data set.Tracking clusters in evolving data streams The methods proposed are characterized by a concise representation of the clusters that have been found at a given point , and therefore allow the clustering of continuously incoming data streams.Labeling data through clustering The incremental methods developed in the project to obtain new training data for classification algorithms .
Schwan , KarstenCCR-0208953InfoFabric Adaptive Services in Distributed Embedded Systems This research is developing Infofabric services to manage multiple shared data streams and enable high performance sensing and communication in dynamically reconfigurable sensor nets .
For example , in emergency response applications , the computing infrastructures employed are rapidly assembled conglomerates of portable and handheld end user devices .
Multiple communication modes are used to interact across collaborating peers and also with local and remote command centers and/or information repositories .
A key problem is that such devices typically can not access , display , and manipulate information with the quality needed by end users .
An example is an observer `in the field ' trying to match visible cloud formations with the outputs produced by remotely running weather simulations , the latter using real-time radar data .
Unless the handheld device can visualize data with high quality and in real-time , field observations can not be used to refine or steer the remote weather prediction programs .
Similarly , search and rescue operations can be aided by rich ( multi-media ) , real-time communications between team members and by high fidelity graphical displays of terrain data available from remote servers.The basic technical problems to be solved for the resulting complex , distributed and embedded applications include ( 1 ) the provision of high levels of flexibility in how , where , and when necessary processing and communication actions are performed on the underlying distributed platforms , and ( 2 ) the ability to continuously meet end user needs despite runtime variations in service locations , platform capabilities ( e.g. , remaining power on end devices ) , and user requirements .
The `InfoFabric ' approach supports data-intensive , embedded applications with lightweight publish/subscribe middleware .
An end user dynamically subscribes to information channels when needed , and the InfoFabric applies the processing specified by the user .
Processing and communication actions are dynamically mapped to the underlying distributed devices and machines .
To attain high performance and meet embedded systems requirements like such as power , new compiler and runtime binary code generation methods dynamically generate and install code on the InfoFabric 's platform .
Code is specialized to match current user needs to available platform resources .
To meet dynamic needs and deal with runtime changes in resource availability , resource management mechanisms associated with middleware carry the performance , usage , and needs information required for runtime adaptation of processing and communication actions .
Because the InfoFabric middleware has detailed knowledge of the ways in which information should be transported and manipulated before delivering it to end users , it can employ techniques like automatic redundancy and replication , and service ( re ) location and ( re ) partitioning to match changing user needs and platform availabilities .
Integrating humans with their naturally developed control algorithm and robots with their extended capability of applying forces and torques into one system offers multiple opportunities for creating a new generation of assistance technology for both healthy and disabled people suffering from neuromuscular diseases and neuro-degenerative disorders .
The exoskeleton is a wearable robotic arm .
It is worn by the human as an orthotic device and acts as a human-amplifier allowing the operator natural control of the device as an extension of his/her body while sharing an external load .
One of the primary innovative ideas of this research is to set the human machine interface at the muscular level of the human physiological hierarchy using an expression of body 's own control command ( surface electromyography - sEMG ) signals as one of the primary command signals of the exoskeleton for improving the synergy between the operator and the exoskeleton .
The goals of this research are to design , build , and experimentally study the integration of a powered exoskeleton controlled by myosignals ( sEMG ) for the human arm with healthy people .
It is anticipated that the scientific activity involved in this research will integrate and fuse multidisciplinary knowledge by promoting dialogues and collaborative work between students and faculty members from different disciplines with a long-term goal of improving the quality of life of the physically disabled community .
Characterizing an Active Magma Chamber at South Sister Volcano , Oregon Constraints From Gravity and GPS MeasurementsEAR-0208490PI Johnson Modeling of InSAR data by the USGS has determined that an uplift of ~0.022 km 3 has developed since approximately 1998 due to an inflation source at 5-7 km depth .
This uplift has not been accompanied by seismic activity .
A goal of this project is to determine if this uplift is attributable to new magma injection , expansion of an existing magma body , or hydrothermal processes .
If magma injection is producing the uplift , then an important second goal will be to characterize the magma chamber .
Important questions to be addressed are 1 ) does the magma chamber at 5-7 km depth contain only material added within the past few years ?
2 ) what is the volume of the magma ?
3 ) is the magma basic or silicic ?
4 ) what is the gas content of the magma ?
These questions will be addressed by modeling the proposed gravity measurements .
Three years of gravity observations on three radial profiles of the uplift will be completed .
Vertical control with leveling and GPS surveys is planned by the USGS and will be available to this project .
The siting of stations and survey schedule will be optimized for the characterization and removal of the annual groundwater and soil moisture signal from this data set .
Central to modeling of the gravity changes is observing the ratio of gravity change to vertical uplift at monitored sites , which may be interpreted in terms of mass and density change at depth .
Charles RubinEAR-0208444This project undertakes studies of two active fault systems in Taiwan , the Chelungpu and Longitudinal Valley faults , which ruptured during large earthquakes in 1999 and 1951 , in order to address recurrence fault behavior and the temporal variability of rupture modes .
Acquisition of rupture time series on the Chelungpu and Longitudinal Valley faults provide constraints on physical models of serial fault rupture and fault interactions .
These results bear on seismic hazard analysis , by considering the physical processes that lead to an earthquake , including the interaction of adjacent fault ruptures , the effect of prior ruptures on a fault , the influence of geologic structure and fault geometry on rupture termination and aseismic versus seismic behavior.Paleoseismic studies along the Chelungpu fault are characterizing its earthquake recurrence and displacement history .
For example , if the recurrence of 1999-like earthquakes is far less frequent , then other structures at the same latitude would have to play an important role in strain relief .
Results from these investigations have implications for understanding the physical processes of strain relief on individual faults and of mountain building .
End-member hypotheses , ranging from unpatterned or random recurrence to highly clustered behavior , are being tested using earthquake time histories obtained along the Chelungpu and adjacent reverse faults.The project also characterizes the active faults of the Longitudinal Valley faults .
Determining the elevations of shoreline angles for a select handful of coastal marine terraces is constraining the millennial rates along the Longitudinal Valley .
Geologic mapping and dating of the fluvial terraces along Shiouguluan River are providing the time-averaged uplift rates between the Longitudinal Valley and the eastern coastal region .
Vadose zone fractures are known to play a significant role in groundwater recharge in desert areas .
This project will evaluate the hypothesis that evaporation from fracture surfaces in the upper vadose zone triggers capillary forces within the matrix that drive pore-water and solutes from the matrix toward the fracture faces .
Evaporation results in salt crust formation on the fracture walls .
Subsequent rain events move water through the fractures dissolving salt crusts and transporting them to the water table .
Furthermore , under desert conditions , nighttime cold temperatures may result in the formation of thermal convection cells within fracture voids , dramatically enhancing evaporation rates .
The project will 1 .
Test the concept of accelerated night-time convection at a fractured-rock field study site .
2 .
Investigate salt crust formation rate in the laboratory for two rocks permeabilities to determine ( a ) time rate of change and strength of the evaporation rate ; ( b ) rate and extent of the salt crust formation ; and ( c ) ratio of nighttime ( convection driven ) to daytime ( diffusion driven ) evaporation rates.3 .
Develop a field scale numerical model to analyze the significance of this mechanism under a range of climatic , fracture and matrix conditions .
Parameters will include fracture aperture , rock permeability and extent of thermal inversion.This study will provide a better understanding of the mechanism for salt accumulation and transport .
It will provide a valuable tool for exploring the importance of this mechanism on a global scale as it relates to salt loading of groundwater resources and bypass toxic solutes in already contaminated sites .
High-Performance Adaptive Receivers for Broadband Multi-User CommunicationsHigh speed communications over wireless channels has emerged as a key feature of future communications systems due in part to the explosive interest in information technology applications , including wireless sensor networks , mobile wearable systems , mobile computing , wireless location ( E911 ) , high-speed mobileinternet , and video transmission over wireless channels .
The demand for higher information capacity in these applications has motivated the use of broadband wireless channels in order to provide wider bandwidth and higher data rates .
This demand has also motivated the development of multi-user communicationschemes in order to allow users to share the same physical channel ; thereby contributing to even higher data rates .
A key challenge that limits the performance of such multi-user communications systems is the distortion introduced by the coupled communication channels , by the interference among users and by thechannel fading conditions .
This research aims at studying and developing adaptive receivers that can combat such distortions by adapting their performance in accordance to the communications environment.The research studies and develops efficient adaptive receivers for broadband multi-user communications by exploiting spatial , data , and model structures in order to reduce computational complexity and increase performance level .
In so doing , it is expected that the resulting schemes will help increase data rates , loweroverhead due to training , lower bit-error-rate , improve signal-to-noise ratio , and help mitigate the ombined effects of inter-symbol interference , inter-user interference , and noise.Such schemes would increase the capacity of broadband wireless networks by allowing multiple users to share the same time slot and frequency band in an efficient manner .
This study focuses onboth time-domain and frequency-domain equalization techniques , with the latter receiving increasing attention since it has been accepted as IEEE 802.16 Standard for Wireless Metropolitan AreaNetworks .
The research is also relevant to other wireless applications such as wireless location ( E911 ) , which has emerged as an essential public safety component of future cellular systems .
This is because this work enables the development of enhanced adaptive techniques that are robust to fast channelfading , low signal-to-noise ratio conditions , and severe multipath propagation situations , all of which are characteristic of the E911 environment Late Cenozoic deformation is broadly distributed across the North American plate margin of the conterminous western United States and stretches from the San Andreas fault system eastward across the Mojave Desert and into the Basin and Range .
The eastern California shear zone and Walker Lane of the western Great Basin form an active belt of structures accommodating about 25 % of the relative motion between North America and the Pacific plate.From the Mojave Desert , the displacement is carried north , east of the southern Sierra Nevada , in a narrow zone of deformation bound on the west and east by the Owens Valley and Furnace Creek fault systems .
North from the latitude of the central Sierra Nevada , the zone of deformation broadens to include the Walker Lane and central Nevada seismic belt in the northwestern Great Basin .
The Sierra Nevada behaves as a coherent tectonic block with a northwest-directed motion of 10-14 mm/yr and forms the western boundary of the zone of distributed deformation in the Great Basin .
A complex pattern of active structures underlies west-central Nevada where displacement is transferred from the eastern California shear zone to the Walker Lane and the central Nevada seismic belt .
Integrated geologic , seismological , and GPS geodetic results indicate that the central Walker Lane ( CWL ) serves as an displacement transfer system linking stepped northwest-trending transcurrent faults .
The displacement transfer system evolved over a period of ~13 Ma and carried at least 50 km right-lateral motion from the Furnace Creek fault system of eastern California to the right-lateral faults of the CWL .
Ancient displacement transfer was accompanied by exhumation of mid-crustal rocks in the extensional stepover between transcurrent structures and was accompanied by vertical axis rotation and tilt of both upper- and lower-plate assemblages .
The transfer system is still active and underlies a region 50 by 120 km immediately northwest of the ancient structures .
Based on existing work , the comparison of a geodetically determined velocity field for the CWL is not easily reconciled with the current understanding of fault displacements in the region and points out the difficulty in comparing geodetic and geologic displacement fields .
Furthermore , the continued activity of the displacement transfer system since inception at ~13 Ma offers presents the opportunity to assess ancient and active rates of deformation using geologic and geodetic techniques.The PI 's propose an integrated geodetic and geologic investigation of the central Walker Lane to address two questions ( 1 ) What is the three-dimensional geometry and displacement history of extensional transfer developed within a transcurrent fault system stepover ? , and ( 2 ) Are displacement rate and kinematic estimates comparable between geodetic , seismological , and geologic investigation of ancient and active structures within the transfer system ?
The central Walker Lane is ideally suited for this study for several reasons ( 1 ) the region is seismically active and well defined earthquake focal mechanisms exist for the displacement transfer fault system , ( 2 ) the faults are well exposed and have produced preliminary fault-slip estimates of deformation kinematics , ( 3 ) a complex present-day displacement field with ~10 mm/yr of differential slip is recorded by a GPS geodetic network , ( 4 ) the geologic evolution of the displacement transfer system is preserved in the exhumation history of well-exposed extensional turtleback structures , ( 5 ) synorogenic volcanic and sedimentary rocks in the upper-plate assemblage of the extensional complex record a history of progressive tilt associated with fault displacement , ( 6 ) regionally extensive domains of differential tilt and vertical axis rotation associated with displacement transfer are recognized in preliminary paleomagnetic investigation , and ( 7 ) regional geologic compilation of the region is mature and provides excellent control for displacement-history reconstruction .
These elements will allow characterization of the kinematics of displacement transfer and offer the opportunity to directly compare deformation kinematics and rates over geologic and geodetic time intervals .
The PI 's will address the tasks listed above with an integrated study utilizing detailed geologic mapping , structural analysis , GPS geodesy , paleomagnetic analysis , geochronology , and thermobarometric investigation .
The research team ( Oldow , Geissman , McClelland , McIntosh , and Selverstone ) have the expertise to address the various research topics and two of the researchers ( Oldow and Geissman ) have substantial experience working in the area .
By building on previous studies , this integrated investigation will establish the areal limits of the transtensional fault system , document variable geometric relations between major and secondary fault systems , define the kinematic history of fault block motion , and develop first-order estimates of recent and ancient displacement .
This grant will host a two day workshop to investigate the current education programs and mission of Field Stations and Marine Laboratories and to develop recommendations on how this mission can be expanded .
It is hoped that concerns on methods of increasing field biology in the undergraduate curriculum , increasing participation by underrepresented groups , collaborations with traditionally minority institutions , community colleges , and museums , and enhancing programs at field stations to cover all areas of biology will be addressed by the participants .
Prior to the workshop , a survey will be conducted to assess the range and diversity of educational programs at field stations and marine labs .
The outcome will be an oral presentation and paper and electronic brochures of the findings and discussions .
0208386MillsIn field studies of groundwater in a range of hydrogeological settings , the rates of microbially mediated geochemical reactions have been shown to be far faster than hydrological transport rates .
These relative rates lead to large changes in concentration of a variety of redox-sensitive chemical species over short distances within aquifers .
In some systems , however , transient hydrological events ( e.g. , heavy precipitation on dry soil or floods in streams ) can rapidly alter the geochemical environment in which the microbes exist .
In that circumstance , the time constants associated with the physical events approach those of the microbially mediated processes .
The proposed research addresses the question How do hydrological processes and biogeochemical processes interact in the riparian-hyporheic zone of streams where time scales of the various processes are on the same order - hours to weeks ?
The proposed research will examine the effect of bank-storage events on reductive microbiological processes occurring in the riparian-hyporheic zone of a low-relief coastal plain stream .
In particular , the concentration of nitrate-N in the groundwater feeding the stream is about 15 mg/liter , but the stream-water concentrations average only 1.6 mg/liter , suggesting high denitrification activity in the riparian- hyporheic zone .
We envision the disruption of anaerobic processes during rain events in which rapid infiltration raises the water table and flushes chemicals ( viz. , nitrate ) in the pore water out into the stream and perfuses the area with oxygenated water .
We expect a similar disruption without flushing during storms in which a rapid rise in stream level pushes oxygenated water into the stream banks , thereby transiently extending the hyporheic zone .
We will also examine the effect of flushing or bank-storage events on the denitrification and will document the rate of return of the functional abilities of the microbial communities to the pre-disturbance levels .
Because these transient events have the potential to affect release of chemicals like nitrate from the groundwater into the surrounding surface waters , we will investigate how transient conditions in riparian soils affect the overall budget of biologically active chemicals .
The proposed work includes detailed field observations , field manipulation experiments , laboratory batch and mesocosm experiments and mathematical modeling .
We anticipate that we will learn how microbially mediated geochemical reactions and transient hydrological processes with time scales on the same order are linked .
We will develop quantitative descriptions of these processes and investigate how frequently biogeochemical processes are reset by different hydrological events the synoptic data that we will examine how the transient effects of local processes influence regional nutrient fluxes .
0208358PapanicolaouSmall-scale cluster bedforms are prevalent in gravel-bed rivers .
An understanding of their mechanics is needed for better understanding of river processes , as well as the development of accurate predictions of bed roughness characteristics , stage-discharge relations , bedload transport , and implementation of restoration plans .
Cluster microforms are one component of the nonlinear system of gravel-bed rivers .
Flow structure and entrainable sediment produce clusters ; once developed , they in turn influence sediment transport and the surrounding flow field.Clusters add to bed stability and delay of sediment motion .
Self-organized clusters have been called a product of stochastic encounters among individual grains .
In natural streams , cluster bedforms are thought to form during recession of flow events great enough to create selective mobilization of bed sediment .
Some think that clusters form in quasi-stable equilibrium so as to maximize flow resistance , producing a wavelength to particle diameter ratio of 20 .
Still others suggest that clusters are a kinematic wave or migratory , rather than stable structure.The project entails extensive laboratory flume experiments to understand the evolution of cluster microforms .
A major- goal is to define the near bed turbulence structure to improve the understanding of the coupling between near-bed turbulence and sediment transport when clusters are present .
A series of experiments will be conducted for non-unisized spheres to examine the cluster geometry , the flow ranges under which clusters form , remain stable , and disintegrate , and the interaction between near-bed hydraulic parameters and clusters bedforms .
The reduced number of variables in the laboratory experiments will allow specific relations between the hydraulic parameters , sediment supply , and resulting particle clusters to be isolated and quantified .
Recent advances in high-resolution cameras and acoustic sensors for measuring turbulence around clusters , combined with the development of hardware for image analysis and bed scanning will allow simultaneous measurements of local sediment transport and adjacent near-bed flow at turbulence-resolving frequencies without disturbing the flow .
0208473KarlstromThis award provides continued funding for the CD-ROM ( Continental Dynamics of the Rocky Mountains ) collaborative investigation which is designed to understand the tectonic evolution of the lithosphere of the southern Rocky Mountains .
A transect from Wyoming to New Mexico is providing an opportunity to evaluate the hypothesis that lithospheric architecture of the Southwest reflects a resolvable mixture of structures that formed during early Proterozoic assembly of the continent and modifications that took place during younger intracratonic tectonism that were themselves influenced by the Proterozoic compositional structure .
Phase 1 ( 1997-2001 ) was successful in substantially verifying this hypothesis .
The PIs imaged the Cheyenne Belt and Jemez lineament ; both are interpreted to be Paleoproterozoic paleosubduction zones that also show long-lived and strong influence on younger intracratonic tectonism .
Both are also associated with lateral changes in deep chemical lithosphere , such that the mantle provinces can be linked to crustal provinces , demonstrating the antiquity of the mantle transitions .
With this bridge funding award , the Principal Investigators will conduct an annual workshop , complete the analysis of data sets generated in Phase 1 , increase productivity in terms of published papers , and prepare for Phase 2 of the CD-ROM project .
*** Optimization problems that arise in practice are often inherentlyonline ; that is , the input data is not available prior tocomputation but , instead , is given as a sequence of requestseach of which must be served before the next one is received.A classical example is the caching problem in two-level memorysystems .
Modern computer architectures enhance memory performanceby storing frequently accessed data items in a cache , which isa small buffer memory .
Memory locations stored in the cachecan be accessed quickly .
Requests to memory locations that arenot in the cache are called faults or misses , and take muchmore time .
After each memory access , an online caching algorithmneeds to decide whether to put the requested item in the cache , and if so , which item to evict from the cache .
The objectiveis to minimize the number of cache faults.Due to incomplete information , online algorithms can not , in general , compute optimal solutions .
This brings up the issue of performanceevaluation how do we tell good algorithms from bad ones ?
One measureof the quality of online algorithms is their competitive ratio , defined as the maximum , over all request sequences , of the ratiosbetween the solution computed by the online algorithm and the optimal ( offline ) solution .
Thus , an algorithm with competitive ratio , say,1.5 , always computes a solution that is within 50 % of the minimum.This research deals with the competitive analysis of online algorithms.Several research directions are being explored .
The first directionis to study general techniques for the design and analysis of onlinealgorithms .
Here , the most promising ideas include thework-function algorithm ( and its extensions ) and the primal-dual method.Both of these techniques , as well as some other , have been successfullyapplied to specific online problems , but the mechanism behind theirsuccess is still poorly understood , and they still require an in-depthstudy to determine their applicability to other problems .
Anotherdirection is to study several extensions of the competitive analysis , including access graphs ( for caching ) , diffuse adversaries , loosecompetitiveness and resource augmentation .
This work focuses on some openproblems related to these models , on adapting these models to otheronline problems , and on designing new problem-specific models .
Theinvestigator is also continuing his work on several classicalproblems in competitive analysis , including the k-serverproblem , several versions of caching and scheduling problems , the k-median problem , and other .
The main goals of these effortsare to develop efficient competitive algorithms for these problemsand to establish matching lower bounds on the competitive ratios .
0208009KumarThe goal of the proposed research is to develop a better understanding of the coupling between the atmospheric and terrestrial ( land ) branches of the hydrologic cycle and identifies the physical basis of their inter-annual variability .
The underlying hypothesis of the proposed research is that the regional atmospheric moisture transport is governed by both the large scale forcing as well as local recycling , and their relative contributions have important implications in the inter-annual variability of the hydrologic cycle .
The relative contributions of advected and recycled moisture may depend on the season , re-ion and the memory of the various reservoirs such as the atmosphere .
near-surface and sub-surface storage .
Two specific science objectives will be addressed in this projectObjective I Identify the modes of the observed inter-annual variability of the hydrologic cycle and the underlying causal mechanism.Objective 2 Identify the roles of land surface and sub-surface storage ( water and snow/ice ) in regulating the inter-annual variability of the hydrologic cycle.Climate variability , natural or human induced .
Have the potential to alter the moisture fluxes , which can have significant societal impact .
For example , it is speculated that C02-induced global warming would lead to an intensification of global water cycle ( an increase in global water fluxes ) , leading to greater -global precipitation .
faster evaporation and a general exacerbation of extreme weather and hydrological regimes including floods and droughts .
In addition we may see a shift in the spatial patterns of transport , resulting from the feedback between the changes in the hydrologic cycle and general circulation patterns .
Changes in hydrologic regimes have implications for water resource management as well as biogeochemical processes in ecosystems .
A better understanding of the dynamics of the hydrologic cycle and the underlying causal mechanism will have significant impact in all areas of water-related processes .
FischerEAR-0208284The investigators propose to better image seismic velocity discontinuities in the mid-upper mantle using broadband Ps and other scattered teleseismic phases .
They will focus on structure in the 150-400 km depth range , where a rich variety of discontinuity structures have been observed .
Testable hypotheses for the origin of these features include the transition from dislocation creep to diffusion creep , layers of rheological weakness due to volatile enrichment , layers of partial melt , mechanical boundaries within the continental lithosphere , and mineralogical phase transformations .
The various mechanisms imply differences in discontinuity depth , polarity , strength and anisotropic properties , and some of these predictions vary between tectonic environments due to changes in mantle temperature .
These predictions will be compared to observed discontinuity structure globally ( using IRIS/Global Seismic Network stations ) , and with focused regional studies in continental cratons , actively deforming continental regions , subduction zones , and beneath a mid-ocean ridge ( using data from PASSCAL experiments and other arrays ) .
Two types of migration will be employed determination of receiver functions by simultaneous deconvolution of data from different geographic or back-azimuth bins , and formal 2D migration .
Receiver function binning as a function of back-azimuth is particularly effective at resolving anisotropy , and the proposed 2D migration has great potential to constrain both P-wave and S-wave velocity contrasts at discontinuities .
This work will help to characterize mid-upper mantle rheology , deformation mechanism , anisotropic fabric , and volatile and melt distributions .
This project investigates spoken language systems for the elderly and non-native speakers of English .
Existing systems have been constructed for the average user and thus perform poorly for these nontraditional populations .
The elderly have little access at present to computerized information , yet they have telephones that would enable them to access computers easily if the information were presented in a way that they could readily understand .
Non-native speakers have difficulty being understood by the same dialogue systems , which need to be adapted to their speech and aid them in finding the correct way to express themselves .
In order to improve the understandability of spoken output , Let 's Go will investigate differences in lexical , prosodic and spectral content to enable elderly and non-native listeners to better understand the message .
In order to improve spoken input , the project will explore adaptation of the statistical models of the lexical and acoustic information of the incoming speech signal for the target populations .
Let 's Go will assess the pertinence of its findings by creating a spoken language demonstrator that allows elderly and non-native users to access Port Authority Transit Bus information over the telephone .
DonnellanEAR-0208179A workshop of the APEC ( Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation ) Cooperation for Earthquake Simulation ( ACES ) group in is being held in May 2002 .
The purpose of the workshop is to review recent progress in several key areas of science and technology related to earthquake simulations and to formulate goint plans for future progress .
Issues being addressed by conferees include data storage , retrieval , assimilation , visualization , and manipulation , integrated with capabilities to instantiate knowledge acquisition and reasoning via models and simulations of nonlinear multi-scale dynamical earthquake processes .
A peer-reviewed proceedings volume and a peer-reviewed special issue of a journal are being published .
Miller , EricNortheastern UThe objective of this work is the creation of a unified approach to characterizing the internal structure of a medium given diffuse wavefield data collected at the boundaries .
Diffusive inverse problems are found in anumber of areas including ( 1 ) medical imaging for breast cancer detection using diffuse optical tomography ( DOT ) ; ( 2 ) non-destructive evaluation ( NDE ) in the steel and semi-conductor industries with photo-thermal methods ; and ( 3 ) monitoring of environmental cleanup processes via electrical resistancetomography ( ERT ) .
Despite the ubiquity of these problems , researchers have typically treated them in application-specific ways due to differences in the physical scale , materials under consideration , and sensing systems .
Here , a unified approach to solving this class of inverse problems is constructed by exploiting the underlying similarities in the physics and processing objectives of each of these problems.The investigators focus on three fundamental difficulties .
First , they design regularization techniques to overcome the ill-posedness of these inverse problems .
Specifically they explore the use of adaptive , geometric , low-order models for the unknown and reconstruct the relatively small number of descriptive parameters in these models .
Second , they design inversion methods that , unlike traditional approaches , do not require precise knowledge of the background structure of the medium .
Solving these nonlinear inverse problems is extremely computationally intensive , in part because a three-dimensional forward problem must be solved thousands of times .
Therefore , a third focus of the research is the development ofcomputationally efficient inversion techniques by exploiting the relationships among the forward problems .
The resulting theory and algorithms will be validated using real sensor data from the threeapplication areas described in the first paragraph DOT , photo-thermal NDE , and ERT .
The purpose of this project is to enhance African American parental involvement with high school student children by developing skills and strategies for effectively managing the educational careers of their children .
It would create a capacity for collaborations with the schools that service African American children by developing the social and organizational infrastructure for continued parental involvement in educational careers .
It seeks to increase enrollment and success of Black students in higher-level mathematics and science courses to diminish the race gap in math and science track placements .
It uses a quasi-experimental design to implement a series of community workshops designed to enhance knowledge , skills , and strategies for managing placements of children in science and math tracks.The research would create an intervention designed to change the outcome of students .
It would conduct ethnographic work to map successful pathways to enrollment in higher-level math courses .
It would use findings from these studies to implement workships within the Black communities , and conduct statistical analysis of the growth in achievement as a result of the reduction in course taking .
The proposed studies are aimed at developing a fundamental understanding of the way in which the self-assembly of fluoropolymers can be harnessed to form periodic nm-length scale polymer structures , controlled by a variety of thermal and optical methods .
In the proposed research we will synthesize and study the surface and bulk properties of semifluorinated ( SF ) LC-coil block copolymers in which the SF group I a monodendron .
The surface will be probed with a variety of techniques , but in particular scanning force microscopy ( SFM ) and near edge X-ray absorption fine structure ( NEXAFS ) measurements will be used to examine surface topography and composition .
A particular focus of the proposed research derives from our recent observation that polymers with SF monodendron side groups are capable of forming not only low energy surfaces , but may spontaneously organize into arrays with periodic organization on the 20 nm length scale that can span regions approaching millimeter dimensions .
The SF monodendrons will be produced with selected alkyl to fluorinated segment ratios , arm number and end group in order to test the model predicting surface curvature .
A photoactive azobenzene group will also be used in mondendron synthesis to both alter the packing structure and take advantage of its photo-optical properties .
By combining the known trans-cis isomerization behavior of the azobenzene chromophore , we also plan to use photoprocessing to direct long-range organization of these surface structures .
In the production of small-scale patterns needed for nanotechnology , there is no convenient process for building structures or modifying surfaces in the 10 to 50 nm length regimes .
Structures that appear homogeneous over micron length scales can be extremely heterogeneous at these smaller dimensions , thus making issues such as the control of surface energy and composition extremely important .
Fluoropolymers are ideal materials for exploring many of these factors in surface and interface design .
The low surface energy of fluoropolymers has attracted interest in such diverse surface control applications as the prevention of protein binding to biomedical surfaces , as environmentally friendly fouling resistant marine coatings and for self-cleaning architectural materials.The unusual transparency of fluoropolymers at short optical wavelengths has lead to their study as next generation photoresists for microelectronics manufacture while their low dielectric constant and refractive index has made their use in microelectronics and communications widespread .
This program will harness self-pattern surfaces .
There exist immense possibilities for applications in biotechnology , information science and advanced materials if patterning at these length scales can be harnessed while simultaneously controlling surface composition .
0208502MandoliThis research project is designed to accomplish two aims Aim 1 To construct and array high-quality BAC libraries to provide a genomic resource on a wide range of species .
Aim 2 To enable researchers working with green algae , non-seed land plants , and seed plants ( including flowering plants ) to identify genes critical for understanding plant form and function and how land plants arose and diversified .
This project will enable progress toward an understanding of the genetic basis for the transitions that mark the most fundamentally important steps in green plant evolution .
The Deep Green community ( http//ucjeps.herb.berkeley.edu/bryolab/deepgene/index.html ) will help to provide an infrastructure for ongoing scientific exchange .
Bioinformatics and a web site will be provided to the community to access these resources ( http//www.genome.clemson.edu/ ) .
Selected Species Desired coverage is given in parentheses .
Where two coverage values are listed , two libraries using different restriction enzymes will be made.Green algae Volvox carteri ( 5x , 5x ) Caulerpa mexicana ( 8x ) Mesostigma viride ( 8x ) Coleochaete orbicularus ( 6.4x , 6.4x ) Chara aspera ( 6x ) Non-seed plantsMarchantia polymorpha ( 8x ) Anthoceros sp .
( 6.3x , 6.3x ) Lycopodium lucidulum ( 5.1x , 5.1x ) Angiopteris erecta ( 6.2x , 6.2x ) Ceratopteris richardii ( 4.8x , 4.8x ) Marsilea quadrifolia ( 5.6x , 5.6x ) Seed plantsAmborella trichopoda ( 5.5x ) Nuphar adventa ( 7x ) Acorus gramineus ( 7x ) Lirodendron tulipifera ( 7x ) Mimulus guttatus ( 7x ) We propose to study the stable carbon and oxygen isotopes preserved in the tooth enamel of Australia 's herbivorous mammals to reveal dietary shifts and environmental changes over the past 24 million years , especially in relation to the spread of the tropical grasses which employ the C4 photosynthetic pathway .
As an island continent , Australia 's physiographic and climatic histories are unique .
Intercontinental biotic migration has been severely constrained by vast transoceanic dispersal distances , which isolated the continent to terrestrial faunal migration for most of the Cenozoic .
Superimposed upon this is the fact that most of Australia 's endemic mammals are marsupials .
They diversified in situ and filled a broad spectrum of niches comparable with placental mammals on other continents .
Australia thus presents us with an unparalleled experiment in mammal evolution an isolated radiation of fundamentally different mammals , adapting to landscape and climatic changes in the absence of competing immigrants .
Stable isotope analyses of Australian herbivore teeth will allow us to examine the relative strengths of hypotheses previously advanced for the expansion of C4 vegetation and faunal turnover in the over the past 24 million years .
Does Australia fit the global model , and if not , why ? The proposal seeks to address the following key issues.1 .
Timing of the appearance and expansion of C4 vegetation in Australia compared with the rest of the world , as interpreted from d13C values in the tooth enamel of the three terrestrial herbivore lineages kangaroos , wombats and diprotodontoids.2 .
Relationships between evolutionary trends in Australian Neogene terrestrial herbivores and shifts in prevailing climate/vegetation regimes inferred from enamel d13C and d18O values.3 .
Development of seasonality in Australian climate since the Miocene deduced from isotopic fluctuations down the profile of ever-growing wombat molars , and relationship to occurrence of C4 plants.4 .
Paleoecologies of late Cenozoic Australian herbivores and communities.Critical to tackling these issues is the need to establish modern Australian isotope baselines .
We will ascertain diet-enamel enrichment factors for extant kangaroos and wombats , and dietary isotopic variation within species across different seasons and environments .
There is no basis for assuming that isotopic offsets between diet and animal tissues established for herbivorous placental mammals will hold for marsupials , especially given their overt differences in developmental biology .
Indeed , our pilot data do reveal marked ontogenetic variation along the molar row for several different kangaroo species .
Our preliminary d13C data of fossil marsupials also indicate a diet containing C4 plants for animals from only the two youngest of 11 northern , central and eastern fossil localities so far sampled .
Both are ~3.4 million years old and , if their C4 signatures can be attributed to grasses , are much younger than those sites in which the earliest appearances of C4 grass diets are observed in Asia , Africa and the Americas .
We intend to extend this initial work to cover all of the significant Neogene fossil deposits in Australia to better outline the isotope changes recorded in the teeth of fossil marsupials through time .
Moulin , PierreU of Ill Urbana- ChampaignThe enormous growth in electronic commerce has led to an urgent need for the protection andauthentication of information , which now is stored and transmitted in massive amounts .
There is amultitude of applications where a signal ( typically audio , image or video ) is to be communicated toa receiver , along with information such as ownership identification or a timestamp authenticatingthe signal .
The communication channel on which the signal is transmitted may be insecure , i.e. , an adversary may modify the signal in such a way that it can no longer be reliably authenticated.In some applications ( e.g. , wireless video transmission ) the channel is considered to be insecurenot due to the presence of an adversary , but because of the significant degradations introducedby the transmission medium .
A secret message necessary for authentication may be embeddedin the signal ( watermarking-based authentication ) or transmitted on a separate channel ( hashing-based authentication ) .
In watermarking , the host data set is intentionally corrupted , but in a covertway , designed to be imperceptible to a casual analysis .
Hashing does not require the signal to bemodified , but requires the transmission of side information about the signal ( authentication tag ) on a separate channel.Signal authentication encompasses applications such as forgery detection and analysis , copyrightprotection for digital media , copy control , fingerprinting ( traitor tracing ) , and database query andretrieval [ 1 ] | [ 30 ] .
Watermarking and authentication are now major activities in audio , image , andvideo processing , and standardization efforts for JPEG-2000 , MPEG-4 , and Digital Video Disksare well underway .
Commercial products are being developed .
Annual International Workshopson information hiding have been held in 1996 , and every year since 1998 .
Special issues of majortechnical journals have recently been recently devoted to information protection [ 31 , 32 , 33 , 34 ] , and comprehensive surveys of image and multimedia watermarking techniques are available from [ 35 , 36 ] .
This study investigates the mechanisms of solar chromospheric heating in relation to photospheric dynamics .
The data available focus on NOAA Active Region 8844 , and feature observations from various satellites ( Yohkoh , SoHO , and TRACE ) as well as a unique balloon-borne experiment ( Flare Genesis Experiment ) .
Analysis should determine not only the photospheric magnetic and velocity fields , but also the electron temperature and emission measure in the overlying transition region .
Particular emphasis will be placed on understanding small-scale transient phenomena like Ellerman bombs .
At the final stage of the project , these events will be modeled by cellular automata models incorporating the self-organized critical behavior of the solar atmosphere , as well as by deterministic hydrodynamic and magneto-hydrodynamic calculations .
Providing assurance of security and privacy is becoming more difficult with current trends towards building computing infrastructure out of distributed components connected by networks , including untrusted client machines .
Important to this assurance are the confidentiality and integrity properties of distributed systems that serve principals whose trust in each other is incomplete .
This description encompasses , among others , clinical information systems , joint military informationsystems , and financial information systems.A new security mechanism , secure program partitioning , can provide stronger , end-to-end assurance that data remains confidential .
In this approach , programs are transformed according to strong securitypolicies , resulting in secure distributed systems .
This is an attractive way to specify and enforce confidentiality and integrity in environments that include untrusted , possibly malicious host machines.Because the integrity of distributed computations and data is difficult to maintain in the presence of untrusted hosts , this research investigates an extension of secure program partitioning to useredundant computation to preserve integrity .
In addition , new models of information flow in concurrent systems are being explored because the current theory and practice of security for concurrent systems isrestrictive , yet also unsound .
This is especially important because distributed systems are naturally concurrent .
Solutions to these problems are being implemented as part of the Jif language system .
The project aims at developing an evaluation methodology for content-based image retrieval .
The research involves ( 1 ) Measurement of the complexity of image testbeds which can be used to quantitatively determine the degree of difficulty in retrieving images from the image testbeds , and ( 2 ) Comparison of the performance of different retrieval approaches which can quantitatively give an objective ranking of the performance of the retrieval approaches .
The project designs a general framework of image feature representations which can be used as a vehicle to conduct statistical analysis on images and forms a basis for establishing the evaluation methodology .
Using this framework , the evaluation method can measure the complexity of the image databases by their cross entropy and rank the retrieval approaches by their cross entropy with respect to a particular testbed .
The image testbeds can thus be compared with each other on their complexity in supporting image querying .
Furthermore , the retrieval techniques can be compared with each other without using queries so the human subjectivity is avoided .
The algorithms developed in this project will be a valuable asset for the community to eventually establish a general theory of the evaluation methodology for content-based image retrieval research .
0208196MalinWith this award , Duke 's seismology group will participate in the collaborative analyses of the passive and active seismic data that will be collected in the SAFOD Pilot Hole .
The group 's research will include investigations of the near-borehole fault and velocity structure , improved earthquake locations using this structure , studies of earthquake-to-receiver path effects and earthquake source effects .
The group 's participation in this research is based on their previous work on the structure and seismology of the SAFOD site and their involvement in development of borehole instruments for the SAFOD program .
The active seismic profiling portion of their proposal is linked to a complimentary proposal ( recommended for funding ) by the University of Wyoming.The Duke Univ .
group will instrument the Pilot Hole with 1 ) a multilevel string of 3-component 12 Hz seismometers ; 2 ) a high sensitivity , large dynamic range , 3-component 2 Hz seismograph , installed at the bottom-of-casing .
The seismic array string and 2 Hz seismograph have been developed in collaboration with oil-exploration instrumentation companies .
The new casing-bottom seismograph , seismic array string , and pressure monitor system will provide unique 3rd and 4th dimension ( depth and time ) , spectral content and volumetric strain information on the microearthquakes that are the targets of the main SAFOD hole .
*** 0208475KlempererThe architecture of continental margins in terms of how they are created is not well understood because most of the previous work has been on successfully rifted margins after rifting is complete .
Both continental ( fault dominated ) end-members and oceanic ( magma dominated ) rift end-members are well studied , but the transitional stage is not understood .
This project will document this critical transition from continental to oceanic rifting .
The PIs will carry out seismic experiments , integrated with geochemical , gravity and structural studies , to study lithospheric structure in one of the rare areas where the transition from continental rifting to incipient spreading is captured - the main Ethiopian Rift ( MER ) .
In the MER the along-axis transition to initial seafloor spreading provides a spatial proxy for temporal variability .
Specific objectives are 1 ) to determine detailed crust and mantle structure across and along a transitional rift segment and 2 ) to understand magmagenesis beneath and within the rift .
The PIs will obtain crustal P-and S-velocity cross-sections that can be interpreted for lithology across the Ethiopian rift at 10 deg .
N where active magmatic centers first appear , and along-strike to the north to study the transition into fully magmatic rifting .
They will interpret existing and new gravity data in light of their new seismic data , and use geochemical data to constrain the physical state of the upper mantle and magmatic inputs to the crust.The project ( US - EAGLE ) is fully integrated with the already funded UK - EAGLE initiative .
Scientists at Leicester , Leeds and London , have been awarded UK funds to carry out a single refraction profile across the Ethiopian rift in January 2003 , coupled with local seismicity studies and teleseismic recording .
The US - EAGLE PIs will shoot and record a complementary orthogonal along-axis wide-angle profile ; and will shoot fan shots into these linear arrays and the local seismic network to provide a measure of 3D coverage .
Together , these seismological experiments form a nested , multi-scale seismic image of the Ethiopian rift and plume .
The seismic studies will be coupled with geochemical and petrological and gravity studies ( US ) , and structural , thermochronological , magnetotelluric and additional gravity studies ( UK ) .
*** SahaiEAR-0208036There is a growing appreciation of the need to understand organic-inorganic interactions at the molecular-level for processes relevant to biogeochemistry as exemplified by silica biomineralization , and to materials science as in the controlled synthesis of biomimetic mesoporous silica .
I propose to investigate the nature of silica interactions with carbohydrates and amines in the aqueous phase combining theoretical and experimental approaches .
We will ( i ) determine whether putative hypercoordinated Si-carbohydrate complexes can play a role in biological silicon uptake , and ( ii ) identify the role of amines in catalyzing the biopolymerization of dissolved silicon species .
The carbohydrates examined will include polyalcohols , sugar-acids and polysaccharides .
The amines will be examined for the most likely pathway of biogenic silica nucleation and polymerization .
Specifically , we will attempt to determine whether the amines act to catalyze hydrolysis of a starting Si-organic compound via a SN2 mechanism or whether polyamines act to bring about aggregation of inorganically formed silica clusters from a starting compound of silicic acid .
For the former mechanism , we will examine amines of different nucleophilicities including methylamine , dimethylamine , pyridine , guanidine , imidazole , lysine , arginine and histidine .
The alternative mechanism will be studied using 1,2-diaminoethane , 1,2-diaminopropane , 1,3-diaminopropane , 1,2,3-triaminopropane , and analogous triamines on a butane backbone as the model polyamines .
The effect of nitrogen hybridization will be determined by comparing 1,3-diaminopentane to imidazole .
Further , the effect of 1,6-diaminohexane versus 1,4-diaminobenzene will permit examination of carbon hybridization effects .
Experimental NMR and Attenuated Total Reflectance Fourier Transform Infra-Red ( ATR FTIR ) spectroscopy will provide independent measurements .
Temperature dependence NMR will provide activation enthalpies .
The computational method used will be ab initio MO theory to calculate the structure , energy , vibrational frequencies and 29Si Nuclear Magnetic Resonance ( NMR ) shifts to explain the experimental spectra , and to determine the electronic contributions to the overall nucleophilicities of the amines .
Many results in computational learning are witnessed by self-referential classes .
For example , one can show that restricting learning machines to output always conjectures consistent with their data lessens learning power | as witnessed by such a class .
Various kinds of algorithmic transformations of witnessing classes ( which can eliminate the self-reference ) preserves some learn ability results and destroys others .
It is proposed to investigate this phenomenon more thoroughly for greater insight into learning .
Machine learning , which is concerned with practical/empirical techniques , seeks robust learners , and , in some cases , provides consistent learners .
The PI and collaborators recently showed that , if one considers a formal robustness requiring that all algorithmic transformations of learnable classes must be uniformly learnable as well , then all such resultantly difficult learning that 's possible can be done by consistent machines .
It is proposed to show this result does not extend to the not-necessarily-uniformly case ( or that it does ) with the hope of thereby gaining insight for machine learning .
It is proposed to extend prior work of the PI and others to provide a theory of learning to coordinate goal-oriented tasks .
U-shaped learning involves learning , unlearning , and re-learning .
U-shaped learning occurs in many domains of human cognitive development ( including language , understanding of temperature , understanding of weight conservation , the interaction between understanding of object tracking and object permanence , and face recognition ) .
In the context of algorithmically learning grammars for ( formal ) languages from any stream of complete positive data about those languages , it has been shown by the PI and collaborators that , for some classes of learnable languages L , any machine M which learns L must exhibit , on some L in L , U-shaped learning .
It is proposed to strengthen and extend this result and to characterize insightfully such classes L and with an eye to informing the cognitive scientist .
Lastly , it is proposed to combine the use of type-2 feasible functional and feasible counting down from notations for constructive ordinals to obtain general concepts of feasible iterative learning .
In general , the separate items proposed above are highly interconnected and mutually reinforcing toward obtaining important and unifying insights for complexity theory , machine learning , and cognitive science .
Handheld computing devices with wireless network connections have a great potential to be powerful mobile tools to access information and software resources in the networked world .
Unfortunately , the computing power and connection time of current handheld devices are severely constrained by the short battery life .
Moreover , the battery issue also places constraints on various design aspects including program memory and secondary storage , CPU , and operating system .
With connection to computing servers through wireless networks , there exist many opportunities for handheld devices to save battery by carefully utilizing the power of the servers .
This project explores compiler and run-time techniques to assist the partitioning of application programs into server tasks and client tasks .
The optimal partition depends on available network bandwidth and on the nature of applications .
In order for handheld devices to optimally exploit servers for a wide range of applications , careful tradeoff is made between energy consumed by network communication versus computation .
The proposed compiler techniques and run-time support include compile-time and run-time analysis of work and communication requirement , exploitation of low-power networking states on handhelds , run-time decision-making , and a light-weight software coherence mechanism .
This project is a collaborative study employing both experimental and theoretical methods to study fundamental questions about forces at surfaces and their implications for the structure and dynamics of thin films .
Key problems to be addressed include when and why many adsorption systems exhibit low-coordination adsorption sites , and whether the existing theory adequately describes the ultra-weak adsorption of simple gases .
These studies will extend the groups ' previous research , which has established a partial empirical and theoretical base for understanding weak adsorption phenomena .
The techniques to be employed are low-energy electron diffraction , He-atom scattering , computer simulations and state-of-the-art theoretical methods .
The importance of these studies is that they will provide a fundamental understanding of adsorption phenomena that will be applicable to many different fields , including nano-patterning , self-assembled monolayers , coatings technology , tribology and chip fabrication .
Students and postdoctoral scholars will be trained in fundamental methods , which are applicable to the aforementioned technologies.Surface science is of importance as a subject of both fundamental interest and potential application to many technologies .
This project addresses a number of basic scientific questions in this area .
Principal problems that will be explored include the structure of films that are just one molecule thick .
A focus of this research is the determination of where individual molecules sit in relation to the underlying supporting surface .
A second major topic is the question of how strongly these films are bound to the surface as well as their dynamics .
In some cases , such films are bound to the surface at high temperature , but not at low temperature .
In other cases , the reverse situation is observed to be the case .
These phenomena , and many others , will be explored with diverse experimental , theoretical and computational methods .
The principal experimental techniques are electron and atom beam scattering from surfaces .
Theory and simulation are to be carried out , using state-of-the-art modeling methods , some of which will be further improved as part of the research .
The research will benefit from the combination of techniques being applied .
Students will be trained in fundamental methods which are applicable to industrial concerns such as the development and fabrication of coatings , lubricants , and computer chips .
This proposal concerns the development of methods to allow a variety of uni-cast , multicast , geocast and location-based mobile ad-hoc routing protocols to adapt .
It addresses specifically the ad-hoc routing protocol design related to quantification of the mobility by specific metrics , in particular mobility , which are used to solve various routing tasks .
In this three-year project , the following research activities will be particularly pursued .
The research team will address the development of local mobility metrics that are specific to individual nodes .
For that purpose , a generic feedback agent that resides on a mobile node will be developed , which gathers the information required to compute the value of the mobility metrics , and present the information to an arbitrary type of protocol .
The simulation studies under a wide variety of network conditions will be con-ducted to determine appropriate trade-offs between active and passive monitor-ing and optimal sampling times for estimating metrics such as node speed , link change rate , link duration , etc .
The project activities will also include the devel-opment of example adaptive routing protocols utilizing the feedback agent .
For example , the research team will explore a protocol that will combine location-based routing with localized flooding in an effort to enable successful packet delivery in times of extreme network mobility ( low link duration times ) .
Finally , the development of new mobility models that are more realistic will be consid-ered .
For example , the networks in which node speeds vary among different parts of the network will be studied , e.g .
for the case of regions where the mobil-ity dynamics vary widely throughout the network .
In addition to the above ac-tivities the research team also plans to address a variety of other metrics such as link change rate and passive and active traffic monitoring metrics .
0208712Denis Pare Understanding memory , that is , how the brain stores information , is a major challenge of contemporary neuroscience .
Indeed , the brain contains an astronomical number of nerve cells that communicate by specialized structures called synapses .
Most neurons make synapses on hundreds to thousands of other neurons and reciprocally .
Much evidence suggests that memory depends on changes in the strength or efficacy of individual synapses distributed across a large population of synapses .
It was shown that when a neuron contributes to excite another nerve cell beyond a certain level , the synapse between these two cells becomes more efficient ( or stronger ) .
However , when synapses with such properties are introduced in computer models of neuronal networks , problems of stability develop because the reinforcement of synapses increases the likelihood that they will be further reinforced , leading the network into unchecked excitation .
Thus , the question is how does the brain prevent runaway increases in the strength of synapses ?
This proposal tests the possibility that when particular synapses are strengthened , other synapses to the same cells are depressed .
Thus , experience would modify the relative strength of synapses , but the total strength of synapses to any given neuron would remain stable .
The proposed work will examine the intracellular mechanisms that allow the strength of individual synapses to change while keeping the total impact of synapses to target cells within normal bounds .
This will be achieved by recording neurons in brain slices kept alive in a dish .
Understanding how the brain keeps the weight of plastic synapses within normal bounds would have important implications for artificial intelligence and robotics where adaptable computer programs simulating neuronal networks constitute the most promising approach toward progress 0208278Romero-SeversonDr .
Romero-Severson and colleagues propose the construction of BAC libraries for five insect taxa ( Tribolium castaneum , Nassonia vitripennis , Oncopeltus fasciatus , Thermobia domestica and Schistocerca Americana ) selected for their phylogenetic position , scientific importance and scarcity of existing genomic resources .
These taxa represent the insect orders Coleoptera ( beetles ) , Hymenoptera ( wasps and bees ) , Hemiptera ( true bugs ) , Thysanura ( silverfish ) and Orthoptera ( grasshoppers and crickets ) .In combination with the whole genome sequences of the Dipteran insects Drosophila melanogaster and Anopheles gambiae , these libraries will enable the scientific community to test important hypotheses concerning insect genetics , genomics , development , ecology , systematics , and evolution .
This effort will dovetail with the ongoing development of an insect genomics database at Purdue University .
The Clemson University Genomics Institute ( CUGI ) is the subcontractor for the BAC library construction .
Over the past five years , the CUGI BAC/EST Resource Center has constructed most of the plant and fungal BAC libraries used in agricultural genomics .
The CUGI BAC/EST Resource Center will supply the insect libraries as high-density hybridization filters and clones on a cost recovery basis for academic programs .
In concept learning , the learner is typically given a sample of instanceslabeled according to some unknown target concept .
The learner ? s task is toconstruct a hypothesis that is a good approximation of the target in areasonable amount of time .
Building concept learning systems has become animportant research area due to the ever-increasing need for analyzing hugeamounts of stored data .
Although many efficient algorithms were constructed forlearning various classes of concepts , these concept classes are extremelysimple .
Further , numerous hardness results seem to suggest that learning moreexpressive concept classes is extremely difficult.Two research directions have evolved in an effort to address the difficulty oflearning more expressive concepts .
One is to construct multiple classifiersystems ( MCS ) and the other is to consider the possibility of activelyinteracting with the environment ( a.k.a .
active learning ) .
Currently , due tothe success of the Adaboost algorithm , theoretical research on MCS ( and in factmachine learning in general ) tends to focus rather narrowly on ensemblemethods .
Similarly , active learning research has been concentrated on the useof membership queries , and to some extent the teaching model .
Other types ofMCS and active learning that may lead to more intelligent learning systems havenot been well studied .
A good understanding of how to build more sophisticatedMCS and exploit other possibilities of extracting information from theenvironment will move us one step closer to achieving the original intent ofmachine learning , which is to automate the knowledge acquisition process .
Thisproposed research will investigate complex multiple classifier and activelearning systems so that the learning of difficult concept classes becomes moretractable .
The investigators organize the Gordon Research Conference onTheoretical Biology and Biomathematics .
The conference has nineformal sessions , each consisting of 2-3 oral presentations withan introduction by a leading scientist in the area , and twoafternoon poster sessions .
A wide variety of topics , rangingfrom global environmental models to mathematical neuroscience togenetic regulation networks , are represented .
The unifying themeof the conference is quantitative modeling of complex biologicalnetworks .
Invited speakers are selected on the basis of theirexpertise in the respective areas , at the same time emphasizinggender balance , minority representation , and incorporatingpromising junior researchers .
The primary goal of this conference is to bring togetherestablished and young investigators from the field ofquantitative biology to share their approaches and progress andto discuss the perspectives .
Such a multidisciplinary conferenceis very important for identifying challenges in biology , biotechnology , and medicine that require quantitative modelingand computational approach .
Moreover , the participation ofstudents and postdocs helps to increase the number of peopleworking in areas of quantitative biology .
Thomas H. HeatonEAR-0208494This project is examining the effects of fault opacity ( the tendency of reflected phases to be trapped in the hanging wall of the fault ) on radiated energy by constructing models of P and SH body waves from shallow thrust fault earthquakes at teleseismic distances .
Three-dimensional finite-element models are used to calculate rupture history assuming a variety of friction models .
These slip histories are used to calculate the teleseismic body waves that results from the different friction models .
Systematic differences are determined between these dynamic models and traditional dislocation models that are commonly used for determining seismic moments .
The main goal is to quantify how teleseismic P and SH body waves from dipping faults are affected by near-source interactions between the seismic waves and a dynamically slipping fault .
It has been common practice to estimate seismic moments by modeling these teleseismic waveforms using double-couple source representations .
In these models , the medium is modeled as an elastic continuum with displacement jumps caused by distributions of double-couple body forces .
While these models satisfy all boundary conditions within a continuous medium , they are not necessarily compatible with the frictional stress boundary conditions on the slipping fault ( a discontinuous medium ) .
In particular , shear waves that reflect off of the Earth 's surface are generally allowed to propagate back through the slipping fault without reflection ; this is sometimes referred to as a transparent fault .
There is a long-standing question about whether or not systematic errors in determining earthquake sizes have been introduced by using transparent fault models .
This study should provide quantitative estimates of the importance of this effect .
Increased computing power allows for three dimensional models to be represented as digital images , which can be manipulated quite easily .
Such advanced computer imaging affects many professions , and is expected to result in fundamental changes in the way those professions organize and conduct their work .
This research will study the way that Frank O. Gehry and his firm of architects uses three-dimensional computer modeling in the design of buildings and the changes that it creates in his architectural practice and in the construction companies that participate with him in his building projects .
It will study both the Frank Gehry firm , Gehry Partners , as well as key contractors , consultants and subcontractors involved in the construction of several of his most innovative building designs .
The objective is to understand how innovation in work practices , technology use and organizational structures accompany the use of advanced three-dimensional computer imaging in both the Gehry Partners ' firm as well as the contractors , consultants and subcontractors associated with his projects .
The objective is to determine whether or not his innovative designs serve as a path creating event for his firm and companies working on his projects .
Path creating events are building projects that require a firm to break from the standard routines established in its industry and develop new approaches to doing its work .
An hypothesis to be explored in this research is that the designs by Gehry Partners require innovation in work practices , technology use , and organization structures by those associated with his building projects .
Another hypothesis is that the path-creating behaviors developed for work on his projects is carried over by the construction firms into other subsequent projects that they work on , including those designed by other architects .
This is a different approach to the study of innovation , since most prior studies have either followed the invention and development of a particular technology over time , or have followed how a given technology is adopted by a population of firms .
Here , innovation is conceptualized as a cascading wake that is initiated by path creating designs and is carried over in multiple forms to other aspects of an industry ( in this case the construction industry ) .
The benefit is a better understanding of how innovation takes place across firms and the network of innovation that is spawned by the adoption of advanced computer technologies in a profession such as architecture .
Despite significant progress in the Belief-desire-intention theories of teamwork and their applications , existing multiagent teamwork research suffers from at least two serious shortcomings .
First , there is no quantitative analysis of the optimality of its prescriptions for agent behavior in teamwork .
Second , there is no analysis of the complexity of the general teamwork problem or specific team coordination decisions .
To address these shortcomings , we propose a novel framework , the COMmunicative Multiagent Team Decision Problem ( COM-MTDP ) .
COM-MTDP is based on the decision-theoretic work in economic team theory , but with significant extensions to introduce dynamics and interagent communication .
As a result , at its core , COM-MTDP is driven by communicating partially observable markov decision processes ( POMDPs ) .
The projected impact of the development of COM-MTDP will be a new , general framework for theoretical and empirical analysis of teamwork .
Thus , rather than simply providing teamwork heuristics , researchers could analyze the computational complexities of the optimal team problem , and analyze the complexity-optimality tradeoffs in proposed team coordination heuristics and implementations .
Such analysis would lead to improved , robust , general team coordination algorithms that explicitly reason about such tradeoffs .
Finally , COM-MTDP ideas could potentially be more generally applicable ( e.g. , in analysis of multiagent contracting algorithms .
) This research is focused on developing circuits and architectures for asynchronous high-performance computers .
Asynchronous organization has a number of significant advantages over the traditional globally synchronous approach that we plan to exploit .
These advantages can be broken down into two general categories those that relate to the circuit-level properties of asynchronous circuits , and those that relate to the higher-level sequential properties of this form of implementation .
Circuit advantages , which are mostly directly related to the absence of the global clock signal , include lower electro-magnetic interference ( EMI ) , lower power , and easier system integration due to the local and modular interconnection of asynchronous system pieces .
Higher-level organizational advantagesinclude the ability of an asynchronous system to adapt to data-dependent delays in system components , take advantage of early completion of system activities , and more naturally mediate sub-taskconcurrency during system operation .
This research is focused on developing a new , symmetric framework for computer architecture prediction motivated by the signals approach to data analysis .
This research uses styles of prediction in two dimensions periodic vs. computational and local history vs. global history .
This is built on top of the principles of discrete signal analysis .
There has been a significant amount of work done on prediction mechanisms , especially for branch behavior .
The initial focus of this new work will be on value prediction because it is the least well understood area .
However , the framework and methodology are applicable to branch prediction , dependence prediction , etc .
This research will investigate new prediction schemes using two techniques analogy between local and global schemes , and data analysis techniques in the case of a computational predictor .
Global predictors can lose accuracy due to pipeline delays .
This research project will investigate methods for avoiding the delay penalty for global predictors .
The detailed microarchitectural simulation involves a high number of tradeoffs .
A detailed study of predictors in that context is a significant study that is included in this project .
There is also considerable work to be performed on combining predictors in cost effective and practical ways .
Rate-Based Resource Allocation Methods for Real-Time Embedded Systems Proposal # 0208924 A .
Revised Project Summary Run-time executives and operating system kernels for embedded systems have long relied exclusively on static priority scheduling of tasks to ensure timing constraints and other correctness conditions are met .
Static priority scheduling is easy to understand and support but it suffers from a number of significant problems such as the complexity of simultaneously mapping timing and importance constraints onto priority values , dealing with tasks whose execution time is either unknown or may vary over time , dealing with tasks whose execution time ( or rate ) deviates from the behavior expected at design-time , degrading system performance gracefully in times of overload , and ensuring full utilization of the processor or other resources in tightly resource constrained systems .
Rate-based resource allocation schemes offer an attractive alternative to traditional static priority scheduling as they offer flexibility in specifying and managing timing and criticality constraints .
In a rate-based system a task is guaranteed to make progress according to a well-defined rate specification such as process x samples per second , or process x messages per second where each message consists of 3-5 consecutive network packets .
This research investigates the use of rate-based resource allocation methods for constructing embedded systems with real-time execution constraints .
The focus of the project is two-fold an algorithm design and analysis component , and a prototype implementation and use component .
In the design/analysis component , a framework is being developed using taxonomy of rate-based resource allocation consisting of proportional share scheduling , polling server-based scheduling , and rate-based extensions to classical Liu and Layland scheduling .
The goal is to relate the different scheduling models and abstractions to one another and to understand the fundamental principles of rate-based resource allocation such as the form and nature of timing guarantees and the algorithmic overhead .
In addition , the existing theory of rate-based resource allocation is extended to deal with considerations such as preemption constraints .
The implementation and use component of this research explores rate-based resource allocation in operating system kernels and applications .
The objective is to assess the fit between the formal task model used to develop a particular allocation algorithm and implementation constraints that arise in practice .
Three scheduling problems are considered application-level scheduling ( i.e. , scheduling of user programs or application threads ) , scheduling the execution of system calls made by applications ( top-half operating system-level scheduling ) , and scheduling asynchronous events generated by devices ( bottom-half operating system-level scheduling ) .
This reflects the logical structure of traditional , monolithic real-time ( and general purpose ) operating systems and kernels with hardware enforced protection boundaries .
The research results will be distributed as an experimental version of FreeBSD that employs different forms of rate-based scheduling and resource allocation at different levels in the system .
Hu , XiaoboCCR-0208992Title System-Level Approaches to Reducing Energy Consumption in Real-Time Embedded System Design Power-manageable hardware devices are essential for reducing system energyconsumption .
In order to benefit maximally from such devices , new and innovative approaches must be developed to fully exploit the dynamically adjustable power v.s .
delay characteristics .
The proposed research aims at developing techniques employed at the system level to reduce energy consumption in battery-powered real-time embedded systems composed of power-manageable hardware resources .
This project strives to obtain a fundamental understanding on the effect of power-manageable resources on both performance and energy consumption during the execution of real-time tasks .
Non-ideal features of real-world power-manageable devices will be considered .
The major activities include i ) devising high-level allocation and scheduling schemes for systems composed of power-manageable devices , ii ) designing and analyzing voltage scheduling algorithms for variable-voltage processors , and iii ) developing techniques to predict power/energy consumed by hardware resources at the micro-architectural level .
Training students to prepare them for energy-conscious design challenges is also a major component of the project , which will be achieved through course development and active involvements of both undergraduate and graduate students in the research .
EAR-0208310Peter E. van KekenLarge amounts of water are carried into the upper mantle by subduction .
It is generally assumed that water is released in near continuous fashion to depths of at least 150-200 km .
However , it is unknown how water is transported from the slab to the volcanic front .
Water in the mantle wedge strongly influences rheological and seismological properties and has a major impact on subduction zone thermal structure .
The investigators propose to study the influence of water on mantle wedge dynamics in a collaborative and multi-disciplinary project .
Recent rheological work has made it possible , for the first time , to quantify the influence of water on creep properties of olivine .
The investigators will systematically study the rheological influence of water , with particular interest in how the observationally inferred water distribution influences the balance of subduction forces and the generation of the cornerflow .
The models provide predictions on subduction zone temperature and composition that allow for critical tests using observational and experimental constraints from seismology and mineral physics .
RUI Quaternary Vertebrate Paleontology and Biogeography of Southeast AlaskaTimothy H. HeatonUniversity of South DakotaEAR-0208247Southeast Alaska occupies a critical position in understanding the human and animal history of North America .
During glacial epochs of the recent Ice Age , central Alaska was connected to Asia by the Bering Land Bridge , and the barriers to intercontinental travel were the large ice sheets that covered most of Canada .
Coastal Alaska was a logical route for travel between ice-free areas because the Pacific Ocean kept the region relatively warm and provided a constant source of food .
Until recently Quaternary fossils were unknown from Southeast Alaska , and geologists and biologists believed that the coast had been completely overridden with ice .
But a decade of research has demonstrated that Southeast Alaska was home to an arctic community of mammals and birds that thrived even during the coldest period of the Last Glacial Maximum .
Beginning in 1990 , limestone caves containing Ice Age fossil remains were discovered on northern Prince of Wales Island .
The most productive of these was On Your Knees Cave , which contained a nearly complete fossil record spanning the last 50,000 years as well as the most extensive archaeological record of Southeast Alaska ( spanning the last 10,000 years ) .
The next step is to excavate caves on multiple islands and on the mainland of Southeast Alaska to gain a complete biogeographic history of the region during and following the Last Glacial Maximum .
Promising sites containing vertebrate fossils have been located on the outermost islands ( Dall , Heceta , and Coronation Islands ) and on the mainland near the town of Wrangell .
Other regions being explored are karst areas of northern Chichagof Island and Glacier Bay National Park .
The objectives of this project are to locate and conduct small-scale excavations at many sites in hopes of finding other fossil deposits of similar antiquity to On Your Knees Cave .
It is also hoped that additional archaeological records can be located that will help determine the antiquity of humans in the region and assess the possibility that Southeast Alaska was a corridor for travel between Asia and North America during the Ice Age .
Energy is becoming the limiting resource for many applications , as processor performance and network bandwidth continue to rapidly advance .
Devices such as wireless sensor networks , cell phones with integrated personal organizers ( PDAs ) , laptops , and even Internet hosting centers are all concerned about power consumption either due to limited battery capacity or the high cost of operating and cooling large server farms .
In many of these systems main memory can become a significant portion of the overall power budget , particularly with the advent of low-power , high-performance processors.This project investigates main memory power management research issues that span several levels of computer system design from the operating system managing memory power states , to the design characteristics of platform architectures , and finally down to the details of internal DRAM organization.This project will investigate power management design decisions within each system level and explore interactions across levels .
Conditional branches are expensive .
Branches require a significantpercentage of the execution cycles since they occur frequently and cancause pipeline stalls .
In addition , branches result in forks in thecontrol flow , which can prevent other code-improving transformationsfrom being applied .
We plan to develop path profile-based techniquesfor replacing the execution of a set of two or more branches with asingle branch on a conventional scalar processor .
We propose toimprove performance by merging the conditions of two or more branchesinto a single condition .
Previous approaches have accomplishedsuch merging of conditions that have either only involved a singlevariable or have required special hardware to merge multipleconditions together .
Techniques will be developed to produce a mergedcondition involving multiple variables that can be used to bypass thecode testing the original set of conditions on a conventional processor.Merging conditions may be very good fit for run-time optimizationsystems , which optimize frequently executed paths during the executionof a program .
For short wavelengths , which carry the most information for very small earthquakes , the complexity of wave propagation in the Earth 's crust makes it difficult to discern effects due to the earthquake source .
Multiple empirical Green 's function analysis , a method that uses extremely small earthquakes to correct for complicated wave propagation effects for somewhat larger earthquakes , when used for these very small events shows that unanticipated wave propagation effects are present even in deep borehole recordings .
This may have led to incorrect conclusions about the energetics of very small ( magnitude less than 2.0 ) earthquakes in past studies .
This technique is being applied to an extensive data set in order to see if these conclusions generalize to earthquakes in diverse environments viz .
the San Andreas fault system in southern California and the deforming crust of Japan .
This is a particularly timely study because propagation effects in borehole recordings may affect measurements obtained from ongoing and planned large-scale downhole experiments in Japan and in California .
The technique developed by Satoshi Ide ( University of Tokyo ) is being used for large earthquakes , to determine the spatial distribution of radiated seismic energy from strong motion models of the earthquake .
Studies of a set of three earthquakes , including the 1995 Kobe , Japan earthquake , shows that most of the seismic energy was radiated near the hypocenter , suggesting that the rest of the faulting process was largely dissipative .
This method is being applied to a much larger available catalog of extended-source models in an attempt to improve understanding how the energy balance during faulting controls the size of an earthquake .
The Wilberforce University Science , Technology , and Engineering Preeminent Undergraduate ( STEP-UP ) Program addresses the underrepresentation of minorities in Science , Technology Engineering and Mathematics ( STEM ) by enhancing minority access , retention , graduation and successful transition to graduate study in STEM fields.The program starts with a Pre-College Summer Institute addressing deficiencies in mathematical reasoning , problem solving , critical reading , verbal reasoning , technical writing and vocabulary building .
During the freshman year , all STEM majors will be housed on the same floors of the men 's and women 's dormitories to foster a sense of community and shared goals as well as to enhance performance rates .
Freshmen will enroll in a series of seminars focussing on careers in STEM and the importance of graduate school .
During the summer between the freshmen and sophomore years , undergraduates will participate in an intensive Summer Program focusing on STEM content , study skills and problem solving .
A series of activities will be put in place to ensure that undergraduates successfully matriculate through the STEM curricula and prepare for graduate school .
These include a peer tutoring-mentor program in all gatekeeper courses including a mandatory two-hour drill session for each course each week , Summer research opportunities in collaboration with Florida A & M University , and a GRE-Preparation Course .
A Science and Engineering Graduate School Fair will allow juniors and seniors to examine various graduate programs and to network with faculty at other universities .
In addition , the biology program will be revised and restructured .
A course in experimental biology will be developed with a focus on emerging techniques required in the biotechnology area .
This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry ( GOALI ) - Faculty and Students in Industry component - award provides support of an Oakland University Systems Engineering Student for a one semester visit with the Advanced Manufacturing Technology Group at the DaimlerChrysler Technology Center .
The research project is to study the development of a supervisory system which monitors the physical manufacturing systems and compares its behavior with that of an equivalent computer simulation model .
It is proposed that if the behavior of the physical manufacturing system varies from that of the computer simulation model due to the modifications made to the physical system , the supervisory system will identify these changes and attempt to modify the model to account for them.The results of the study will be communicated through a series of company briefings , as well as publications in appropriate academic journals .
The investigators will study plasma patches and blobs in the night-side ionosphere using multiple instruments and modeling .
These large-scale enhancements in ionospheric electron density have deleterious effects on navigation , communication , and surveillance systems at high latitudes .
The primary observational technique to be applied in the study is ionospheric tomography using a network of five beacon satellite receivers along the west coast of Greenland .
This is a collaborative effort involving the University of Texas ( UT ) at Austin and Southwest Research Institute ( SwRI ) .
SwRI investigators will provide model simulations of the polar cap ionosphere during patch event time intervals .
UT Austin investigators will analyze the data from the beacon satellite receivers .
The study will emphasize complete and detailed analyses of selected patch events to identify the origin and evolution of these structures in the high latitude ionosphere .
The primary motivation for studying patches and blobs is to be able to specify and predict the large amplitude and phase scintillation effects on operational systems .
Professor Kevin Lehmann of Princeton University is supported with an SGER grant from the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program to develop an optical fiber version of chemical ring down spectroscopy that will allow measurement of trace species in gases and possibly liquids .
The method takes advantage of the long pathlength involved in cavity ring down , as well as evanescent properties of the light wave in the fiber .
If successful , this sensor could be used to detect chemical and biological species over distances , e.g .
using fiber optic cables through buildings or reservoirs .
Fiberoptic bundles can be used to multitask the sensing .
The use of available communication equipment potentially makes this a viable cost-efficient system .
The applications include national security , environmental monitoring , and possibly in vivo medical monitoring .
This award is to establish a Network for Computational Nanotechnology ( NCN ) at Purdue University with three-fold mission ( 1 ) to catalyze the formation of teams of theorists , computational scientists , and experimentalists in research that addresses key challenges in realizing integrated nanosystems ; ( 2 ) to support the research and the broader National Nanotechnology Initiative with an infrastructure that provides ready access to high-perfomence computing and visualization , facilities collaboration , delivers simulation services , and enables solutions to large , multi-scale problems by assembling standard , open-source components tht are available to the entire community ; and ( 3 ) to develop educational packages that can be incorporated into the curricula to train students , scientists , and engineers .
The NCN will initially address three research themes ( 1 ) nanoelectronics , ( 2 ) naoelctromechanics , and ( 3 ) nsnobioelectronics .
The University of Illinois , Urbana/Champaign , Stanford University , Northwestern University , and University of Florida will be initial participants .
The core research topics and participants will evolve while preserving relevance and leadership in the rapidly developing field of nanoscience .
A number of special projects will be undertaken designed to address the need for a second-generation network computing platform .
This award is for an initial period of five years , subject to renewal for another five years .
This grant provides funding for the investigation of optimal and near-optimal strategies for defense of critical infrastructure from an intelligent and adaptable adversary .
Game-theoretic optimization models will be developed taking into account the structure of the system to be defended ( e.g. , series and/or parallel subsystems ) , and also varying assumptions about the goals , knowledge , and constraints of both the defender and the adversary .
Systems that are too complex to yield closed-form optimal results will be analyzing using a heuristic attack strategy that is demonstrably near-optimal for a wide range of cases , as a basis for developing optimal or near-optimal defenses against those attack strategies.If successful , the results of this research will lead to improved guidance for allocation of resources to critical infrastructure protection .
The primary goal of this work is to identify defensive investment strategies that are optimized to defend against attackers with varying assumed goals , knowledge , and constraints .
For example , attacker goals may include maximizing the probability that an attack succeeds , maximizing the damage caused by an attack if successful , or maximizing the expected value of the damage caused by an attack .
Similarly , attackers may have differing levels of knowledge about the system 's defensive investments , and differing constraints ( e.g. , limits on the number of failed attacks before the attacker is detected and disabled .
Determining optimal or near-optimal strategies to defend against attackers with varying characteristics will help both to improve the security of our critical infrastructure , and also to reduce the cost of critical infrastructure protection .
This work will also contribute to the computational tools and methodologies available for resource allocation problems in complex systems .
This project will contribute to our nation 's capacity for increasing the number ofpeople with disabilities employed in the science , technology , engineering , andmathematics ( STEM ) work force by demonstrating the effectiveness of an innovativecombination of person centered career planning activities , ongoing mentoring , and handson experiences in the sciences .
This combination of activities is designed to 1 .
) increaserecognition of the interests and needs of students with disabilities in the STEM careerareas , 2 .
) create a more supportive academic and professional climate for persons withdisabilities , 3 .
) promote accessibility and appropriateness of instructional materials andeducational technologies at multiple levels ( high school , community college , anduniversity ) , and 4 .
) increase the availability of academic enrichment experiences such asmentoring and hands-on experiences in the STEM areas.To meet these broad goals , the SIU SY-STEM project will*Identify students ' preferences and interests for specific STEM-related careerareas .
*Increase receptivity of educators ( secondary and post-secondary math and scienceeducators ) and of guidance counselors for including of students with disabilitiesin STEM-related curriculum experiences .
*Impact adaptations , accommodations , and instructional strategies used byeducators in STEM classes and labs at multiple levels .
*Foster academic and professional development in STEM related career areas byincreased access to career exploration experiences and mentoring.A fundamental premise of this project is that the best way to impact employment ofpersons with disabilities in the sciences is by simultaneously increasing the numbers ofpeople in the pipeline leading to these careers and enhancing the capacity of secondaryand post-secondary training institutions to successfully include students with disabilities.Twenty-five teams of students , parents , educators , and guidance counselors from 25 highschools in southern Illinois will participate in intensive one-day workshops on personcentered career planning .
From these 25 student teams , six students will be selected toparticipate in an intensive , on-campus Summer Institute at Southern Illinois University.This Institute will expose students to a variety of careers in the sciences and engage themin a series of rotations in various lab sciences .
University students with disabilities will berecruited to work in close affiliation with a graduate student mentor and faculty mentorsto provide ongoing support for the workshop and Institute participants.The SIU SY-STEM project will impact involvement of persons with disabilities inSTEM areas of study at multiple levels , including the personal and professionaldevelopment of high school and college students with disabilities , and changes in theeducational resources , willingness , and capacity to support these students in high school , community college , and university programs .
Although this project is designed as aregional demonstration involving high schools , consortia of community colleges , andSouthern Illinois University , it is the intention of the applicant to sustain this initiative bybuilding broader , more comprehensive regional/national networks and alliances .
To thatend , the project includes a comprehensive evaluation component and widespreaddissemination plan .
This project supports activities of the U.S. National Committee for the International Union of Psychological Science ( USNC/IUPsyS ) .
The USNC exists to represent the United States in the scientific union , which is a member of the International Council for Science ( ICSU ) .
The objective of this program is to support effective U.S. participation and strong leadership in the international union in response to expanding needs in international science and technology .
It will accomplish this by taking advantage of the volunteer tradition of the National Research Council ( NRC ) -- a tradition that attracts top-level scientists and researchers to serve on USNCs .
International Unions affiliated with ICSU facilitate the exchange of scientific information , forge international agreements on standards and measurements , act as scientific advisers to intergovernmental agencies , and promote the right of all scientists to participate in their activities without political or any other form of discrimination .
This project engages the U.S. research community in international activities by providing opportunities for colleagues from around the world to meet on common ground , builds partnerships , and discusses collaborations .
0228894ElserThis is a U.S.-China joint workshop proposed by Dr. James Elser , Arizona State University , on ecological complexity and ecosystem services .
The workshop will bring together American and Chinese researchers in biocomplexity and ecosystem services in a series of interactions designed to establish a network of international collaboration and exchange .
A preliminary meeting between U.S. and Chinese organizers will be held in November , 2002 , and a U.S. delegation of 12 scientists will visit China in spring , 2003.The intellectual merit of this proposal is outstanding .
The area of ecosystem services is emerging as a topic for fundamental research .
The proposed collaborative activities would benefit ecological science and its contribution to the management of complex ecological/economic systems .
The Chinese Academy of Sciences , the National Natural Science Foundation of China , and NSF will jointly support the cooperative activities .
The investigator proposes to use Kontsevich 's space of stable maps ( originally motivated by mathematical physics last decade ) and relatedobjects to tackle problems in a variety of fields .
Traditionally , thespace of stable maps has been studied using facts about the fundamentalmoduli space of curves defined by Deligne and Mumford .
The investigatorproposes to conversely study the moduli space of curves by studying mapsfrom curves to varieties .
Some of the proposed work will likely rely onJun Li 's recent extension of Kontsevich 's work , the definition of a spaceof relative stable maps in the algebraic category.It has long been known that nodal algebraic curves are a powerful tool inalgebraic geometry .
They can be thought of as surfaces with holes ( picture a ball , a donut , or a french cruller ) with pairs of points gluedtogether .
Earlier this decade , ideas from string theory in physics ledto the introduction of stable maps , parametrizing certain kinds of mapsof nodal curves into another space .
This development has proved to beincredibly fruitful , sparking advances in a variety of fields .
Theinvestigator 's area of research is the use of these ideas in the field ofalgebraic geometry , in particular with applications to many other fields ( such as enumerative geometry , arithmetic geometry , combinatorics , andphysics ) .
A grant has been awarded to Dr. Paul Wolf of Utah State University to investigate green plant evolution .
Humans rely on green plants for food , shelter , clothing , and for providing the oxygen that is essential to life .
From a biological perspective and as one of the oldest and most diverse branches of the tree of life , green plants provide an unparalleled system in which to explore interrelationships of living organisms and to approach some of the most significant and intriguing questions concerning the diversification of life on earth .
Many of these questions relate to fundamental evolutionary events , such as the transition of organisms from single-celled to multicellular body plans , the colonization of land , and the derivation of different life-cycle modes .
Accordingly , understanding their evolutionary history is a critical component in the NSF 's Assembling the Tree of Life program.This grant is part of a collaborative project , including principal investigators from the Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences , the University of California at Berkeley , Southern Illinois University , Utah State University , the University of Washington , and Yale University , the focus will be 1 ) resolving the primary pattern of diversification among green plants ; 2 ) investigating questions relating to the long evolutionary history of these organisms ; 3 ) providing a model for analysis that will be applicable to other groups of organisms with extensive evolutionary histories .
The team will emphasize the development of novel analytical methods that make it possible to conduct analyses across multiple scales and to use all of the available data from heterogeneous sources .
A solid backbone of relationships based on genomes and structure for 50-100 plants , representing the critical deep-branching lineages , will enable the integration of previous and ongoing studies of many more plants into a comprehensive picture of green plant genealogy .
The primary objectives of the project are 1 ) complete a matrix of whole genome sequences for chloroplasts and mitochondria , and develop Bacterial Artificial Chromosome ( BAC ) nuclear genome libraries ; 2 ) produce a comprehensive set of comparable morphological and ultrastructural data for the same plants ; and 3 ) incorporate inferences from across the phylogenetic hierarchy in green plants using methods designed to permit scaling across studies .
Multiple integrated training , educational and outreach activities will result in continual dissemination of the activities and progress of this research group to the scientific community and beyond.Paul Wolf will coordinate the acquisition of genome sequence data for the project .
This includes obtaining appropriate plant material , ensuring sample flow from DNA extraction to genome sequencing , filling in gaps in genome sequences , databasing and entering into public domain the sequence data , and performing evolutionary analyses .
The overall goal is to establish a high performance connection to the Abilene advanced Internet facility to support science research .
To achieve this connection Brandeis will establish the advanced connection via Northern CrossRoads ( NoX ) to the Abilene network .
Brandeis will link to the NoX gigapop directly through a leased fiber connection provided by RCN , which will also provide the end switches and the circuit monitoring equipment as well as manage the circuit .
The proposers have identified four areas of research that require the use of a high performance network connection .
The investigators in each of these areas of research have coped with inadequate bandwidth for a number of years .
They have been remarkably adaptive in working out ways to deal with this situation , but the time has come to sustain their research with a high performance Internet connection .
Uranium-series isotopes have provided unique insight into geochemical rates and processes during genesis of basaltic magma from the earth 's mantle .
Specifically , recent measurements of the longer-lived isotopes of the U-decay series have placed important constraints on melting rates ( related to solid mantle upwelling rates ) and melt fractions .
However , there have been relatively few measurements of the shorter-lived isotopes of the U decay series in basaltic samples .
As a result , time-dependant parameters such as melt transport rates and magma storage times are not well known .
To better constrain these parameters , under this SGER award , the PIs propose to measure short-lived 227Ac ( t1/2 =21.8 y ) in young basaltic samples from mid-ocean spreading centers and intraplate volcanoes like Hawaii .
This geochronologic system has the potential to be an important chronometer for dating of young mid-ocean ridge basalts in the time range of 10-100 years .
Development of a new counting technique for 227Ac has simplified its analysis making this research possible for the first time .
This award supports a postdoctoral researcher to study the coupling between tropospheric disturbances , such as hurricanes and tropical depressions , and the lower thermosphere/ionosphere region .
The objective of the research is three-fold 1 ) Observe possible effects of hurricanes and tropical depressions on the F-region ionosphere , 2 ) Ascertain whether the tropical storms produce observable gravity wave propagation into the thermosphere , and 3 ) Determine if gravity waves or electric fields are more likely to produce F-region disturbances .
The approach is to assemble a database of F-region measurements coincident with storm occurrence .
The study will use ionosonde and incoherent scatter radar measurements made at the Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico .
After assembling the database , the data will be analyzed for F-region disturbances , the relative position and strength of any associated tropical storm , and variations in F-region density and electric fields .
Understanding the coupling between the ionosphere and other atmospheric regions contributes to knowledge of space weather and its impacts on technical systems .
The atmospheric tides are global scale oscillations in the basic state of the Earths atmosphere ( winds , temperature and density ) that are forced in the lower-atmosphere and propagate vertically into the upper atmosphere and ionosphere .
Over the past decade basic understanding of the migrating atmospheric tides has emerged , largely from an increase in the number of ground-based observatories across the globe making wind and temperature measurements of the mesosphere- and lower-thermosphere ( MLT ) roughly between 70 and 120km .
The continuing increase in the availability of observational data from ground and space based instruments is providing atmospheric scientists with the opportunity to improve their theoretical understanding of the mechanisms that drive atmospheric tides .
This is accomplished through a process that includes both numerical models and observational data .
The basic approach for this research is to use the Whole Atmosphere Community Climate Model ( WACCM ) that has been under development at the National Center for Atmospheric Research .
WACCM is a fully nonlinear , four-dimensional global circulation model of the atmosphere spanning from the surface to an altitude of 140km .
Analysis of WACCM results will be compared with the global network of MLT observations , including those from the recently launched TIMED spacecraft , to validate the tidal and planetary wave structure simulated by the model .
Once validated , the model will be utilized to estimate the affect of global scale planetary waves on the structure of the atmospheric tides .
Professor Michl proposes to oirganize the Quilmes Nanoscience Workshop Electronics and Molecules and Quantum Dots at Quilmes near Tucuman , Argentina , on May 16-20 , 2003 , combining forces with his US colleague , Professor Kubiak of the University of California , San Diego and two Argentinian colleagues , Professors Ernesto Calvo ( Chemistry ) and Oscar Martinez ( Physics ) of the University of Buenos Aires .
The subject is related to photophysics , charge transport , and rod-shaped molecules .
This research program investigates the theory and pragmatics of naming and sharing data and computation threads , using principles of optimal evaluation and linear logic .
These tools explicitly highlight the operations of copying and discarding that are essential in procedure calling protocols.The project analyzes the algorithmics of optimal evaluation , the complexity of box management , and the evaluation pragmatics for languages with explicit control .
Also included in the research agenda are intensional full abstraction theorems , where the meaning of a term includes operational information about how computations are shared , and the use of context semantics as a flow analysis tool , where the so-called geometry of interaction can give information about how procedures access their arguments .
A further investigation of `` superposition '' phenomena that occur in high-level sharing is planned .
The final component seeks a refined explanation of the bus system of graph reduction in terms of linear logic , in the hope of giving a new categorical rendition of the incremental computation that characterizes optimal evaluation .
A grant has been awarded to Dr. Charles J. O'Kelly of the Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences to investigate green plant evolution .
Humans rely on green plants for food , shelter , clothing , and for providing the oxygen that is essential to life .
From a biological perspective and as one of the oldest and most diverse branches of the tree of life , green plants provide an unparalleled system in which to explore interrelationships of living organisms and to approach some of the most significant and intriguing questions concerning the diversification of life on earth .
Many of these questions relate to fundamental evolutionary events , such as the transition of organisms from single-celled to multicellular body plans , the colonization of land , and the derivation of different life-cycle modes .
Accordingly , understanding their evolutionary history is a critical component in the NSF 's Assembling the Tree of Life program .
This grant is part of a collaborative project , including principal investigators from the Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences , the University of California at Berkeley , Southern Illinois University , Utah State University , the University of Washington , and Yale University , the focus will be 1 ) resolving the primary pattern of diversification among green plants ; 2 ) investigating questions relating to the long evolutionary history of these organisms ; 3 ) providing a model for analysis that will be applicable to other groups of organisms with extensive evolutionary histories .
The team will emphasize the development of novel analytical methods that make it possible to conduct analyses across multiple scales and to use all of the available data from heterogeneous sources .
A solid backbone of relationships based on genomes and structure for 50-100 plants , representing the critical deep-branching lineages , will enable the integration of previous and ongoing studies of many more plants into a comprehensive picture of green plant genealogy .
The primary objectives of the project are 1 ) complete a matrix of whole genome sequences for chloroplasts and mitochondria , and develop Bacterial Artificial Chromosome ( BAC ) nuclear genome libraries ; 2 ) produce a comprehensive set of comparable morphological and ultrastructural data for the same plants ; and 3 ) incorporate inferences from across the phylogenetic hierarchy in green plants using methods designed to permit scaling across studies .
Multiple integrated training , educational and outreach activities will result in continual dissemination of the activities and progress of this research group to the scientific community and beyond .
Charles O'Kelly will oversee the entire project .
He will also have primary responsibilities for collecting and databasing morphological and ultrastructural data for the green algae included in this study .
He will assist in the interpretation of green algal molecular data , and in the generation of project-associated websites and related dissemination tools .
0228903DzombakAcid mine drainage ( AMD ) from abandoned underground mines is and has long been the most serious water quality and watershed degradation problem in the mining regions of the U.S. As a result of underground coal and metal mining operations , pyrite ( FeS2 ) becomes exposed to water , resulting in its dissolution and release of iron and sulfuric acid to solution , as well as metals and other constituents from acid-induced dissolution of additional minerals .
Moreover , a significant fraction of the global fluvial sulfate flux arises from pyrite dissolution , and the contribution is increasing due to mining activities .
While pyrite dissolution is of great importance in sulfur cycling and in AMD formation , our understanding of this process and our ability to model it are very limited .
This project will exploit recent advances in iron isotope measurement techniques to study pyrite dissolution in a novel manner in the laboratory and in the field .
An important objective will be to test and demonstrate the power of using iron isotopes to quantify and source-track the dissolution of pyrite in abandoned coal mine outflows .
It is hypothesized that the 56Fe/54Fe isotopic ratio will be distinct for sedimentary pyrites formed under different conditions , and that the process of pyrite dissolution itself could lead to measurable isotopic fractionation .
To test this , the 56Fe/54Fe isotopic ratio in sedimentary pyrite from different depositional environments of the Appalachian basin will be determined .
The rates of dissolution of some of these samples , and resulting aqueous phase isotopic fractionation , will be investigated in the laboratory using a batch reactor developed specifically for quantifying pyrite dissolution under tightly controlled redox and aqueous phase conditions .
The laboratory and field data will allow us to evaluate our ability to use 56Fe/54Fe as a tracer for the primary source of Fe in AMD outflows .
Results obtained will provide the basis for moving forward with additional studies of more complex systems , especially systems with bacteria present that can mediate the pyrite dissolution process .
This is a collaborative research award involving the University of Texas at Dallas and Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory .
The investigators will use data from the SuperDARN radar network and the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program ( DMSP ) to study convection in the high latitude ionosphere .
Both the SuperDARN radars and the DMSP spacecraft make routine measurements of ionospheric plasma motion , but both suffer from temporal and spatial limitations in their coverage .
The study will begin with the calibration and validation of the two data sets , leading to the development of techniques to reconcile the observations .
Once that is complete , combined data sets will be used to study the ionospheric response to changes in the interplanetary magnetic field ( IMF ) .
Specific questions to be addressed are the saturation of the cross polar cap potential when the IMF is southward , the response time of the convection to changes in the IMF , and convection patterns when the IMF is strongly northward .
This work will aid in the development of space weather models which are used to predict conditions in the space environment that affect technological systems , such as electric power , navigation , and communication .
Biomechanical Modeling to Forensic Estimation of Time Since DeathAbstract This proposal is designed to address the question Can the time of death for a human be estimated from measured changes in mechanical material properties of specific tissues post-mortem ?
A multidisciplinary team , consisting of a Forensic Anthropologist , an Anatomist and a Mechanical Engineer , has been formed to attempt to answer this question .
Since this research is at such a preliminary stage the NSF Small Grants for Exploratory Research is the appropriate mechanism for initial funding of the project .
To gain insight into the mechanical degradation of human tissue after death , the tissue must be chosen from a location in the body which decomposes at a relatively slow rate .
Because of tissue encapsulation , we have chosen intervertebral discs ( annulus fibrosus ) in the spine as the most likely test specimens for this study , however , other tissues ( e.g .
teeth ) will be considered as the testing protocol is developed .
Initially , three ( limited by cost ) human vertebral columns will be harvested from fresh ( unpreserved ) cadavers for which time of death is known .
The intervertebral discs will be surgically extracted from the thoracic and lumbar regions of the spinal columns at specified time intervals .
These harvested discs will be described macroscopically and microscopically , then mechanical material properties will be determined from quasi-static , dynamic and time-dependent compression testing imposed by an Instron 8511 Mechanical Testing Machine .
Additionally , pilot studies using ultrasound techniques will be investigated .
The load and deformation data acquired from the mechanical tests will be modeled using the power law , exponential law , homography or other applicable constitutive laws appropriate for biological material to determine material parameters at specific times since death .
It is expected that a trend between the material parameters and time since death will emerge .
University of Maryland College Park will study the experience of S & E-trained women in the chemical industry .
There are three areas of study Contextual Patterns , Individual Experiences , and Effective Interventions.Scientific Issues* What contextual patterns and influences exist with respect to the role of S & E-trained women in the chemical industry ?
* What have been the individual experiences of S & E-trained women in the chemical industry , and what vocationally-inhibitory and -facilitative factors can be identified from their reports ?
* What formal and informal strategies currently are being used to increase S & E-trainedwomen 's participation in the chemical industry , and how effective are they ? Contextual Patterns will be assessed through quantitative investigation of organizational patterns of women 's participation in chemical business and industry in the U.S. over time .
This will include identifying a national , representative sample of chemical businesses , gaining access to archival and current organizational data on male and female employment patterns , and administering an organizational survey to management.Individual Experiences will be assessed through both quantitative ( survey ) and qualitative ( interview ) investigation .
A survey will be administered to a large , national , representative sample of women in chemical business and industry to assess their self-reported experiences in occupational preparation , entry , and advancement .
A representative sub-sample of these participants ( diverse in race/ethnicity , age , work setting , S & E sub-field , and education ) will be interviewed to explore more specifically the variables that have inhibited or facilitated their career trajectories in the chemical industry.Effective Interventions will be assessed through both quantitative ( survey ) and qualitative ( interview ) investigation , as well as literature review .
The quantitative portions of Studies 1 and 2 and the qualitative portion of Study 2 will include assessment of formal and informal strategies currently used by companies to increase women 's participation ; interviews also will be conducted with a sub-sample of management personnel from Study 1 regarding their perceptions of intervention strategies , to compare to the responses from individual women .
These data will be combined with a literature review to identify best practices interventions.Science and engineering ( S & E ) fields are considered crucial to U.S. economic growth and are expanding rapidly .
Demographic trends indicate that women and minorities represent the greatest increases in workforce participation ; however , the continued under-representation of women ( including minority women ) in S & E fields is well documented .
Much of the attention to women 's relative absence from S & E fields has focused on women in academe , and very little is known about women in other S & E settings .
Industry is the largest employer of S & E workers , but women are less likely than men to be employed in the industrial sector .
Data regarding why women fail to enter industrial settings in predictable numbers and what happens to them there are virtually non-existent .
Moreover , very little is known about the prevalence or effectiveness of strategies currently being used to address the paucity of women in industry.The Broader Impacts of the study include* Providing a model for the study of demographic diversity in one industry* Identification of best practices interventions to enhance the careers of women in S & E business and industry .
* Training of graduate and undergraduate students in research methods of the social sciences .
0228880DanylukTravel support is provided for a group of US tribologist to attend the Asian tribology conference , which is held every four years and which is named ASIATRIB .
The group will include several graduate students and postdocs .
The purpose of the trip is to discover the status of the field in the Asian countries , in particular in the rapidly growing industrial economies of Korea , China and Taiwan , and to explore possible areas of future collaborative research .
*** Baylor University proposes to access a high performance network connection to a GigaPOP in Texas ( UTD ) in order to establish a local connection to the Abilene network .
This high-speed connection will allow the university access to Internet2 providing Baylor researchers and students with a powerful array of previously unavailable tools , linkages and information sources .
The Baylor Internet2 project will include as a collaborator , Texas State Technical College Waco ( TSTC ) .
TSTC is a regional data and video network hub with significant existing hardware and personnel support infrastructure .
The combined human and technical resources of Baylor University and TSTC along with the commitment of both institutions to use the Abilene network connection to enhance existing research , workforce development and educational outreach efforts will provide a framework to support continuation of these exciting applications well beyond the life of this project .
The HPNC Proposal is an integral part of Baylor University 's Vision 2012 , an ambitious ten-year plan for moving the university forward in both innovative education and pure research .
Vision 2012 includes a significant investment on the part of the university administration in new tenure-track faculty and post-doctoral positions , faculty research release time and lab infrastructure .
As part of this vision , a state of the art science facility ( ~ $ 110 million dollars ) will come on-line during the same time that the HPNC Proposal is scheduled for implementation .
Immediate impact areas for the HPNC Proposal include theoretical modeling in plasma and shock physics , theoretical modeling in superstring and m-theory , STEM educational outreach projects , advanced data connections , scalable multicast key exchange for layered data delivery , multicast protocol components , virtual routing infrastructure , spatial analysis and visualization , and innovative applications of distance learning technology .
Baylor 's collaboration with TSTC enhances the overall proposal by providing another layer of use for the HPNC project while also leveraging an NSF investment .
With its focus on workforce development , a connection to Internet2 would allow TSTC to provide incumbent worker training in a wide variety of technical areas such as robotics , electronics , chemical instrumentation , safety , and certification standards to name but a few .
Additionally , the college could enhance its existing coursework in e-commerce , computer networking and computer architecture .
New areas of endeavor ( already in the planning stage ) such as virtual reality technology for simulation and training would also be made possible through this technology .
A final area of impact for TSTC would involve its deaf and hearing impaired student population .
For such students , classroom experiences and real-time interpreting services via Internet2 as well as the transition into the workplace would be greatly facilitated by the increased bandwidth and resulting real-time video linkage possibilities provided by such a connection .
This project partners the University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio ( UTHSCSA ) and the University of Texas at San Antonio ( UTSA ) , in the south Texas region , for connectivity to an advanced network .
Southwest Research Institute ( SwRI ) will serve as the sponsor for UTHSCSA and UTSA and will provide experienced technical and engineering staff to assist in connecting to the Abilene network through the Austin POP via a DS-3 line .
UTHSCSA and UTSA have a combined annual research budget of over 113 million dollars , enroll over 21,000 students and both are Hispanic-serving institutions with 56 % female enrollment .
The proposed high-speed network will enhance collaborations with scientists at 21 other Abilene-connected institutions and will immediately support eleven research projects via Abilene University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio Global Analysis of Hydrodynamic and Thermodynamic Properties of Macromolecules Development of a Remote NMR Data Acquisition Infrastructure Single Molecule Video Microscopy High-Speed Data Sharing of Brainmap Images University of Texas at San Antonio GEneral NEural SImulation System ( GENESIS ) Software System Analysis of the information content of cortical waves in the turtle visual system IP-friendly Quality-of-Service Mechanisms Adaptive Transport Protocols for High-Speed Networks A Tool for Distance Learning Learning Community Across Campuses and Institutions Grid Computation Analysis of Uncertainty Management in the Design and Construction of Blast Resistance Structures for Anti-Terrorist Applications These research projects range from strictly biological ( e.g. , biochemistry at the level of single molecules ) to strictly computer science ( e.g .
network transport protocols that adapt rapidly to the available network capacity ) .
Between the extremes are interdisciplinary research projects at the interface of biological science and mathematics ( e.g. , general neural simulation system , probabilistic reference system for the human brain , and numerical modeling of a turtle 's visual system ) plus education of future teachers ( e.g. , development of teaching strategies and the application of technology ) .
A grant has been awarded to Dr. William K Thomas at the University of New Hampshire and his colleagues Dr. James Baldwin and Dr. Paul De Ley ( University of California , Riverside ) , Dr. David Fitch ( New York University ) and Dr. Steven Nadler ( University of California , Davis ) to examine the evolutionary history and biodiversity of nematodes .
The phylum Nematoda ( roundworms ) is argued to be one of the most abundant and genetically diverse animal phyla on earth .
In addition , they play a key position in animal evolution and understanding of controversial invertebrate evolutionary relationships .
Phylogenetic studies of this enormous phylum have been impeded by the difficulty of working with such diverse taxa , most of which are microscopic and known by relatively few experts .
Nematode phylogenetics has also been impeded by the fragmentation of taxonomic specialists among different disciplines and by bias toward economically or medically important parasites of plants , vertebrates and invertebrates .
Accordingly , understanding their evolutionary history is a critical component in the NSF 's Assembling the Tree of Life program .
This project will develop a higher-level tree for the nematodes to provide a framework for interpreting their diversity .
The work will use both molecular ( 18S ribosomal genes ) and morphological data for over 1000 species .
In a parallel effort , they will use the results of this work as a basis for selecting 50 nematode species for construction of cDNA libraries to provide greater insight into genetic diversity in the phylum and to possibly resolve the longstanding questions about of the deepest branches of the nematode tree or even its phylogenetic position in the animal kingdom .
Not Available This award provides funding for the REVEL Project , an outreach and teacher professional development program that builds on a pilot program initiated at the University of Washington ( UW ) in 1996 .
The program will include twelve K-12 teachers from a variety of states in a suite of activities related to ongoing research on hydrothermal vent systems of the Endeavour and Juan de Fuca plate systems .
The teachers will participate in cruises aboard the R/V THOMPSON or the R/V ATLANTIS and will have first-hand experience working on sea-going oceanographic research .
They will work with the submersible ALVIN or an autonomous underwater vehicle called ABE .
In addition , they will participate in pre and post-cruise workshops to ensure that the experiences they gain at sea can be translated to their students and other classrooms .
The overall goal of the project is to encourage collaboration and partnerships between research groups and science educators .
Significant matching funds have been provided by the University for shiptime each year .
The program will be jointly funded by the Division of Ocean Sciences and Division of Elementary , Secondary and Informal Education .
0228268McCulloughThis award supports a study to determine the feasibility of developing and employing a broad variety of indicators that will enable monitoring of project outputs and outcomes at the program level for the Partnerships for Innovation Program .
The study will examine which types of project outputs and outcomes should be monitored ; which specific indicators will be useful and valid for monitoring the program ; and how to resolve whatever difficulties the awardees in the Partnerships for Innovation Program would face in regularly collecting and reporting the data .
The study will develop and validate an array of quantitative and qualitative indicators needed for monitoring the full range of activities supported by the Partnerships for Innovation Program .
The current awards will be analyzed to categorize its goals , progress , outcomes and impacts .
Indicators will be developed to measure proximate outputs at the project level .
A sample of the awards will be selected for interactive input to test the validity of the indicators as well as to obtain input of the investigators on potential methodologies to obtain the data .
The sample will be selected by the range of activities in the award .
Participation by the awardees will be on a voluntary basis .
NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0103823Mathematical Sciences Nonlinear Elliptic Boundary Value ProblemsAbstractDMS-0103823KeyfitzThe major focus of this project is to develop systematic theories to understand the solution structures of nonlinear elliptic boundary value problems arising from change-of-type systems in multidimensional conservation laws , and from experiments in morphogenesis and ecological systems .
It is a distinctive feature of multidimensional conservation laws in self-similar coordinates that they change type , being hyperbolic far from the origin but of mixed type near the origin .
Analysis of behavior near the origin gives rise to interesting open problems in elliptic partial differential equations , including nonlinear free boundary value problems , degenerate oblique boundary problems , and quasilinear degenerate elliptic systems .
Such problems arise in many different combinations in the study of two-dimensional Riemann problems , including those for the compressible Euler equations of gas dynamics .
This project also investigates a class of singular non-quasimonotone elliptic systems that arise in models of biological morphogenesis experiments and certain predator-prey interactions .
Multidimensional conservation laws are mathematical models for fundamental processes in physics and engineering , such as high-speed flows and supersonic jets .
While tools for numerical simulations of multidimensional conservation laws have been developed extensively , there is very little analytical theory available .
It is our goal to establish parts of the needed theory and to investigate the structure of solutions for such problems .
The results of the project will have application to a wide a variety of physical systems .
0228725SpataforaFungi make up one of the major lineages of life , and include important decay organisms and pathogens of humans , plants , and animals .
There are roughly 80,000 described species of Fungi , but the actual diversity in the group has been estimated to be as high as 1.5 million species .
This collaborative project by five major investigators and their numerous colleagues worldwide will generate the first global synthesis of the phylogenetic history of the fungi , which is necessary to expand our knowledge of the history of life on Earth as well as the origin of ecosystems and adaptive features that can have a direct impact on human health .
Assembling the Fungal Tree of Life ( the AFToL project ) will significantly enhance our understanding of the fungal kingdom , especially ancient relationships that are not resolved among the chytrids , zygomycetes , ascomycetes , and basidiomycetes .
The AFToL project will develop large data sets of molecular and non-molecular ( morphological , anatomical , life-history ) characters , which will be accessible via the world-wide web in continuously updated databases .
Molecular characters to be acquired include DNA sequences for seven nuclear genes sampled from approximately 1500 species , representing all major groups of Fungi .
Nonmolecular characters to be sampled include cellular machinery associated with nuclear and cell division and cell wall biochemistry .
The AFToL project will be based in five laboratories at four universities with the core responsibilities of the participating laboratories as follows David Hibbett ( Clark University ) , collection of molecular data from Basidiomycota ; Francois Lutzoni ( Duke University ) , collection of molecular data from Ascomycota including lichens and bioinformatics ; David McLaughlin ( University of Minnesota ) , collection and databasing of morphological characters ; Joseph Spatafora ( Oregon State University ) , collection of molecular data from Ascomycota ; and Rytas Vilgalys ( Duke University ) , collection of molecular data from Chytridiomycota and Zygomycota .
The AFToL project will involve more than 115 members of the international fungal systematics community in 23 countries for all stages of the project , from selection of taxa to collection and analyses of data .
It will be the policy of the AFToL project that all validated data will be released via the web as soon as they have been generated .
Fungi play crucial ecological roles as decayers , mutualistic symbionts , and pathogens , including pathogens of humans .
The economic significance of fungi is almost incalculable ; they perform vital ecological services and their functional roles are the subject of diverse applied disciplines , including agriculture , medicine , and drug discovery , to name just a few .
A phylogenetic database for Fungi will facilitate the creation of powerful diagnostic and forensic tools for environmental surveys and other applications , and will enable the discovery of the many fungal species that remain undescribed .
Training and outreach activities are an important aspect of the AFToL project and will take several forms including graduate and post-doctoral training , support for visiting graduate students , undergraduate training , summer courses for high school teachers , and website resources for K-12 educators .
In 1998 the President 's Partnership for Advanced Technology in Housing , or PATH , program was initiated , with the goal to develop and disseminate new technologies for the housing industry .
The specific goals of the PATH program are to reduce the monthly cost of housing by 20 % , to improve the durability and reduce maintenance costs of housing , to reduce the environmental impact and energy use of housing , and to reduce the risk of loss of life , injury and property destruction from natural hazards .
Since 2000 , more than twenty research projects have been funded by the National Science Foundation in support of the PATH program .
The purpose of this project is to supplemental travel support for eleven of the NSF-funded PATH principal investigators to attend the International Conference on Advances in Building Technology , which will be held in December 4-6 , 2000 in Hong Kong .
The NSF funded investigators will be presenting the results of their investigations in two technical sessions at the conference , devoted specifically to the NSF-funded PATH projects .
This will provide a unique opportunity to showcase the NSF-funded work to the international community in a single , coherent , venue .
The supplemental support will help offset the high cost of foreign travel .
The flow of visual information from the eye ( retina ) to the areas of the brain ( cerebral cortex ) necessary for visual perception is routed through a brain structure known as the thalamus .
Part of the thalamus called the lateral geniculate nucleus ( LGN ) serves as a relay station between the retina and visual cortex .
Current research indicates that the LGN plays an important role in visual processing and should be thought of as a dynamic filter as opposed to a relay .
The aim of this research project is to understand the functional role of the inhibitory mechanisms of the LGN ( and nearby brain areas ) .
Of particular interest is how inhibitory neurons are involved in filtering out retinal information from this visual pathway .
The PI 's approach is mathematical and computational .
After constructing a biophysically and anatomically detailed mathematical model of the LGN neuronal network , numerical experiments will quantify the input/output properties of the simulated neural network .
The LGN model will then be used to predict the influence of inhibitory mechanisms on the relay of retinal information to visual cortex .
Because the LGN is the most extensively studied thalamic relay nuclei , it is a good system in which to study the role of inhibition in sensory processing by thalamus .
This study of a sensory thalamic relay may suggest approaches to investigating the role of the thalamus in intracortical communication , a fundamental aspect of brain function .
Georges Bank supports a rich fishery because ( 1 ) large portions of the bank are shallow enough that light-limitation of phytoplankton is usually not important ; ( 2 ) deep waters rich in inorganic nutrients are available for mixing onto the bank ; and ( 3 ) the Bank 's clockwise circulation can retain the planktonic stages of important fish species .
The tidally mixed front ( TMF ) is central to the productivity of Georges Bank through the processes of nutrient injection in the north and retention of larvae on the south flank .
These two regions are connected by a circulation pathway along the front in which nutrients lead to phytoplankton and zooplankton growth , creating a donut-shaped region of high production surrounding the crest .
It is suggested that the productivity of this pathway is the result of northern edge nutrient injections and is susceptible to climatic influences on nutrient supply in that region .
The overall objective of this project is to understand the processes within the TMF that sustain the biological productivity of Georges Bank and the success of the target species , cod and haddock .
This requires understanding how mixing and circulation within the TMF supplies new nutrients , supports primary production , and retain larvae .
GLOBEC dye tracer experiments have , for the first time , measured directly the near-bottom Lagrangian circulation and mixing in the TMF .
Results show that vertical mixing in the front , and the on-bank flow through the base of the TMF , are dynamically connected .
This study is examining the 3-dimensional dynamics of the TMF based on these measurements .
Models will help assess how the strength of the across- and along-isobath circulation sets time and space scales compatible with the development of cod and haddock larvae .
This project consists of a mix of data analysis and modeling activities .
First , dye dispersion data and simple shear dispersion models are being used to understand the link between cross-bank flow and vertical mixing .
Second , a finite-volume coastal ocean model ( FVCOM ) will be used to calculate the temporal and spatial structure of nutrient flux into the TMF , contrasting northern and southern flank inputs .
A coupled FVCOM- NPZ ( nutrient-phytoplankton-zooplankton ) model are being used to test the following hypotheses ( i ) Nutrient injections in the north are advected around the crest of the bank and lead to a plume of elevated phytoplankton and zooplankton production .
( ii ) The plume enriches the area of larval entrainment on the south flank .
If the above statements are true , then production in the plume can be altered by the nutrient content of source waters in the Northeast Channel of the Gulf of Maine , and these changes will affect the feeding environment of larval cod and haddock .
Finally , models incorporating the measured 3-D flow and turbulence fields are being used to examine spatial patterns of larval retention and define the kinds of environmental transitions that larvae experience during this process .
This project will enable The University of Toledo to provide 45 Mbps connections to support faculty research , research collaboration , and collaboration for specific educational projects .
The project provides needed bandwidth for seven applications needing to transfer large data sets , images , and video files .
The projects are o X-ray Crystallography that provides UT chemists with access to national synchrotron laboratories and to other Ohio researchers involved in the Ohio Crystallography Consortium ; o Geographic Information Systems and Remote Sensing that provides access to OhioView and to other remote data centers ; o Internet-based Laboratories that provides high bandwidth , high fidelity connection to transfer data , control signals , audio , and video in real-time for Internet-based laboratory experiments ; o Astrophysical Data and Observations to access archived data and for remote observing and control ; o Computational Studies of G Protein-Coupled Receptors in a Lipid Bilayer to access the Ohio Supercomputer Center and other supercomputers ; o Speech-language Pathology to provide therapeutic services to distant or mobility impaired clients with language disorders ; and o Large Scale ATM and MLS Network Simulation to collaborate with the Ohio Supercomputer Center on research issues related to simulation of large scale Multi-Protocol Label Switching networks .
HerzbergEAR-0228592Theories on the FeO content of the Archean mantle are difficult to test because direct rock samples that were melted to produce basaltic crust have never been identified and described .
Uncertainties in mantle FeO content have profound consequences on understanding mantle dynamics because Fe is much heavier than all other rock-forming elements , and even a modest iron-enrichment must be compensated by large temperature increases in order to maintain neutral buoyancy .
Therefore , the recent discovery of a complete ophiolite with tectonized mantle peridotite from the North China Craton ( Kusky et al. , 2001 ; Science 292 , 1142-1145 ) is of monumental importance because it has created an unprecedented opportunity for constraining the FeO content of the Archean mantle .
Unfortunately , the mantle samples from the North China Craton have been metamorphosed , and the extent to which the original Archean geochemistry has been modified is not presently known .
We plan on evaluating whether it is feasible to extract from these samples the original mantle FeO content in a 1-year exploratory pilot project .
We will use the JEOL-8600 Superprobe with Advanced Microbeam upgrade at Rutgers University to obtain chemistry data on metamorphic and possible relect igneous minerals .
Microimage software will be used to obtain modal analyses of 1-4 million points per thin section , and this will permit a mass balance calculation to be made of whole rock major element geochemistry .
Mineral and whole rock chemistry obtained at Rutgers University will be crosschecked with whole rock major element geochemistry obtained by collaborator A. Polat at Windsor University ( Canada ) using XRFS .
These data will be compared with the composition of mantle peridotite from abyssal peridotites and ophiolites of Phanerozoic ages .
Any differences in composition will be evaluated in terms of possible 1 ) different igneous T-P histories , 2 ) metamorphric alteration effects , or 3 ) secular variations in mantle composition .
To plan and manage a workshop on the replacement of the R.V.I.B .
Nathanial B. Palmer to the held in Washington , D.C. , June 25 -26 , 2002 , at the William and Mary Washington Office .
The workshop will be held be the principal investigator , Dr. Walker O. Smith , Professor at the Virginia Institute of Marine Science of the College of William and Mary .
Studies of positional behavior ( locomotion and posture ) are central to key issues in biological anthropology including primate origins and arboreal adaptations , hominoid climbing , and hominid bipedalism .
The study of locomotion and posture provides critical information concerning ecological , anatomical and evolutionary relationships in living species , a comparative framework for interpretation of the fossil record , and as an educational tool for conservation and ecological planning .
This research examines the ontogeny ( the life history of an individual ) of positional behavior and details of limb and prehensile-tail use in three New World primate species ( Ateles geoffroyi , Alouatta palliata , and Cebus capucinus ) inhabiting a tropical rainforest in Costa Rica .
During the course of growth and development , individuals face different challenges in exploiting their environment .
Ontogenetic data allow assessment of behavioral and morphological changes as they occur and developmental constraints on positional behavior among closely-related species .
While ontogeny is critical to our understanding of positional behavior , there are no field studies that assess its effects on New World primates .
White-faced capuchins ( Cebus ) , black handed spider monkeys ( Ateles ) , and mantled howling monkeys ( Alouatta ) will be examined at La Suerte Biological Research Station in Costa Rica .
Behavioral observations in conjunction with digital video recording will be used to document positional strategies during infancy , juvenescence , and adulthood to address the following objectives .
First , this research will provide a comprehensive , systematic , and quantified description of expressed behavior , functional morphology , and ecological context of three prehensile-tailed species .
Second , data on juvenile and adult positional strategies will provide information on how growth and development may influence feeding and foraging strategy , social behavior , and ultimately survival during the juvenile period .
Third , because the prehensile tail has evolved independently in the subfamily Atelinae ( Alouatta , Ateles , Brachyteles , and Lagothrix ) and Cebus , this study will allow comparison of the prehensile tail as a shared-derived feature in two more closely-related species ( Ateles and Alouatta ) , and as an analogous feature in the more distantly- related Cebus .
Closely-related howler and spider monkeys are biobehavioral variations on the ateline theme , that is , large-bodied , long-tailed New World primates with extensive gripping capabilities .
Capuchin monkeys , also with prehensile abilities of the tail , differ in body size and tail anatomy ( and evolutionary history ) .
This project will contribute a comprehensive , systematic , and quantified description of expressed behavior and ecological context in three New World primates inhabiting the same rainforest .
By focusing on questions of ontogenetic differences in positional behavior , this study examines the degree to which adult-like patterns of locomotion and posture develop in primate ontogeny and how patterns may differ within and between age and sex categories .
Finally , the results of this research will be used in the conservation planning and maintenance of the rainforest surrounding La Suerte Biological Research Station .
As part of these efforts , results will contribute to educational programs in the surrounding community and in the United States .
The proposed research builds on previous research examining public policy and cultural values of stakeholders in land use policy for arctic wilderness areas .
The proposed research expands on the previous research by investigating ways of reducing land use conflict in arctic wilderness areas .
Through both quantitative and qualitative research methods , Dr. Gladden will do a comparison of three case studies of wilderness areas in Finnish Lapland , Alaska , and the Yukon Territories of Canada .
Four research hypotheses will be examined to explain the variation in conflict between local and non-local groups in the three case study areas 1 ) increased policy control by local residents reduces conflict , 2 ) increased participation in planning processes reduces conflict , 3 ) legal integration of national laws leads to decreased conflict , 4 ) reduced focus on ideological values in the planning process , decreases conflict .
0228603PapautskyThe objective of this project is to develop a new breed of self-contained microelectrodes that can be used in the environment to monitor a variety of constituents in contaminated soils and sediments .
These devices will consist of a microelectrode intimately connected to a microelectronic signal processor to reduce noise and increase robustness .
These devices will ultimately include a transmitter to telemeter the information to a conventional data storage device and will be powered by a miniature battery .
The goals of the proposed research are threefold ( 1 ) develop the fundamental science to microfabricate the integrtated microelectrodes , ( 2 ) design , and fabricate , a microprocessor to process and amplify signals from the microelectrodes and ( 3 ) demonstrate integrated microelectrode arrays for environmental monitoring using proof-of-concept sensors .
If successful , this project will have benefit at the thousands of hazardous waste sites in the US that require monitoring of the soils , sediments and ground waters for a variety of constituents , including toxic or hazardous materials and environmental parameters .
EAR-0228818FerreFrictional heating during coseismic deformation can lead to the melting of the fault rocks and formation of pseudotachylite if slip is important .
The increasingly reported existence of earthquake lightning shows that transient coseismic electric currents of large intensity are associated with large magnitude earthquakes ( M > 6.0 ) .
Such currents are likely to follow pseudotachylite veins because their electric conductivity , being melts , is considerably larger than that of the unmolten rocks .
All previous and preliminary results on fault-related pseudotachylites show that they have an anomalously high remanent magnetization .
Their remanent magnetic properties are similar to those of lightning struck rocks , which suggests that large electric pulses were involved in the magnetization .
This project aims at demonstrating that remanence anomalies in pseudotachylites are generally observed and that coseismic electric currents are responsible for it .
The investigators propose to test the hypothesis on three young pseudotachylites from seismically active fault zones ( California , Japan and Western Alps ) by collecting oriented samples for paleomagnetic studies .
Samples collected at various points with respect to the main fault plane will enable us to test the coseismic current hypothesis .
The geometry and the characteristics of the magnetizing field will be compared with the Earth 's magnetic field at the time of pseudotachylite formation .
This will provide an independent second test for the coseismic current hypothesis .
A series of experiments will generate artificial pseudotachylites using the friction welding method .
The artificial and natural pseudotachylites will be compared to assess the possible causes of anomalous magnetization in natural specimens .
The direct study of coseismic currents is made difficult by their transient nature .
This problem can be circumvented by using the remanent magnetic record of rocks affected by the electrical phenomenon .
This research will open new directions of investigation on coseismic electric currents in fault rocks and should contribute to a better understanding of coseismic electric phenomena -- 0228671McLaughlinFungi make up one of the major lineages of life , and include important decay organisms and pathogens of humans , plants , and animals .
There are roughly 80,000 described species of Fungi , but the actual diversity in the group has been estimated to be as high as 1.5 million species .
This collaborative project by five major investigators and their numerous colleagues worldwide will generate the first global synthesis of the phylogenetic history of the fungi , which is necessary to expand our knowledge of the history of life on Earth as well as the origin of ecosystems and adaptive features that can have a direct impact on human health .
Assembling the Fungal Tree of Life ( the AFToL project ) will significantly enhance our understanding of the fungal kingdom , especially ancient relationships that are not resolved among the chytrids , zygomycetes , ascomycetes , and basidiomycetes .
The AFToL project will develop large data sets of molecular and non-molecular ( morphological , anatomical , life-history ) characters , which will be accessible via the world-wide web in continuously updated databases .
Molecular characters to be acquired include DNA sequences for seven nuclear genes sampled from approximately 1500 species , representing all major groups of Fungi .
Nonmolecular characters to be sampled include cellular machinery associated with nuclear and cell division and cell wall biochemistry .
The AFToL project will be based in five laboratories at four universities with the core responsibilities of the participating laboratories as follows David Hibbett ( Clark University ) , collection of molecular data from Basidiomycota ; Francois Lutzoni ( Duke University ) , collection of molecular data from Ascomycota including lichens and bioinformatics ; David McLaughlin ( University of Minnesota ) , collection and databasing of morphological characters ; Joseph Spatafora ( Oregon State University ) , collection of molecular data from Ascomycota ; and Rytas Vilgalys ( Duke University ) , collection of molecular data from Chytridiomycota and Zygomycota .
The AFToL project will involve more than 115 members of the international fungal systematics community in 23 countries for all stages of the project , from selection of taxa to collection and analyses of data .
It will be the policy of the AFToL project that all validated data will be released via the web as soon as they have been generated .
Fungi play crucial ecological roles as decayers , mutualistic symbionts , and pathogens , including pathogens of humans .
The economic significance of fungi is almost incalculable ; they perform vital ecological services and their functional roles are the subject of diverse applied disciplines , including agriculture , medicine , and drug discovery , to name just a few .
A phylogenetic database for Fungi will facilitate the creation of powerful diagnostic and forensic tools for environmental surveys and other applications , and will enable the discovery of the many fungal species that remain undescribed .
Training and outreach activities are an important aspect of the AFToL project and will take several forms including graduate and post-doctoral training , support for visiting graduate students , undergraduate training , summer courses for high school teachers , and website resources for K-12 educators .
The Center for the Integration of Research , Teaching , and Learning ( CIRTL ) at the University of Wisconsin-Madison , in collaboration with Michigan State University and Pennsylvania State University , is creating an interdisciplinary program to prepare graduate students , post-doctoral researchers and current faculty to meet the challenges of STEM higher education .
This Higher Education Center for Learning and Teaching is based on a teaching-as-research concept that enables future and current STEM faculty to engage in teaching in the same way they engage in their research .
The project integrates teaching-as-research and interdisciplinary learning communities in a professional development program that addresses the educational responsibilities of current and future faculty .
The professional development program includes a curriculum that provides a foundation for teaching-as-research and improved classroom practice , experiential learning in informal education and instructional materials development , internships in a variety of learning environments , and preparation for teaching and learning with diverse student populations .
The focus of the research component is on promoting best practices in post-secondary STEM teaching and learning , fostering change in STEM graduate-through-faculty cultures , and transferring successful strategies between departments and across universities .
Through national implementation of the professional development program , CIRTL is expected to serve approximately 2,000 STEM graduate students and post-doctoral researchers annually while establishing learning communities for graduates-through-faculty at 10 research universities representing 10 % of the major U.S. graduate institutions .
This project is jointly funded by the Division of Undergraduate Education in the Directorate for Education and Human Resources and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences .
AST-0227859Andrews , Polly Ms. Polly Andrews is awarded funds at the Denver Museum of Nature and Science to develop an Internship Program for the new Space Odyssey exhibit .
The funds will , for one year , support one full-time resident teacher intern , the equivalent of one half FTE research scientist ( allocated over two part-time content specific researchers ) , two part-time graduate students , and four part-time undergraduate students from different disciplines .
These interns will work with Museum staff to develop and prototype educational programs for Space Odyssey .
The scientists , teacher , students , and Museum staff will work together in teams to create or upgrade classes that cover topics in solar system astronomy , stellar astronomy , and astrobiology .
In addition , a separate new program will be developed that highlights the latest developments in astronomy and space science in a news format .
The scientists will ensure that the scientific content for the classes will provide a balanced and cutting-edge view of contemporary space science research .
The teacher will ensure that the content presented in the classes is both age- and curriculum- appropriate , and that the programs meet teachers ' needs .
The students will gain valuable experience by serving as research and program assistants .
Space Odyssey has the potential to reach 1.5 million annual Museum visitors .
This project is supported by the Office of Multidisciplinary Actitivies in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences .
United States participation in and leadership of international Arctic science will be strengthened by a senior U.S. Arctic research scientist representing the interests of the U.S. Arctic science community in the International Arctic Science Committee ( IASC ) and by serving as President of the IASC Council .
The Arctic is very important scientifically and plays a strong role in global , including climate , change .
However the conduct of research in the Arctic poses many pragmatic problems , e.g. , it is a harsh and remote environment ; no permanent facilities can be located in much of the region ; and eight different countries control various parts of the Arctic Ocean and adjacent land areas .
Thus , international cooperation in the Arctic is not only useful , but often essential .
IASC , established in 1990 to encourage and promote such cooperation , provides a forum for exchange of information among scientists and between scientists and governments on a wide variety of Arctic science topics .
IASC also supports international coordination of national Arctic research efforts by supporting small focused scientific planning meetings/workshops .
U.S. participation and leadership in IASC and its Council will assist IASC to address on a priority basis an assessment of the impact of the climate and climatic changes on the Arctic and its peoples ; development of an international bathymetric chart of the Arctic Ocean ; a study of the role of humans in caribou/reindeer grazing systems ; a study of biocomplexity and biodiversity in Arctic tundra ecosystems ; and providing scientific advice to the Arctic Council , an intergovernmental organization that focuses on interaction between the Arctic environment and its indigenous peoples .
AbstractThe University of Washington ( UW ) requests funding for the Northwest Alliance for Accessto Science , Technology , Engineering and Mathematics ( STEM ) to increase the quantity andquality of people with disabilities in STEM careers.Intellectual Merit and Qualifications of PartnersThe lead agency is the UW 's award-winning DO-IT ( Disabilities , Opportunities , Internetworkingand Technology ) program , which has conducted successful NSF PPD projects since 1992.Regional site teams at the two largest STEM research institutions in the State of Washington , theUW and Washington State University ( WSU ) , will collaborate with K-12 and postsecondaryschools , employers , and leading STEM research institutions in neighboring states - theUniversity of Idaho , the University of Oregon , Oregon State University , and the University ofAlaska in Anchorage and Fairbanks .
The project will partner with ENTRY POINT !
to place STEMpostsecondary students with disabilities in paid internships .
It will collaborate with MESA ( Mathematics , Engineering , Science Achievement ) adapting for students with disabilities thehands-on science activities and teacher training strategies it uses with racial/ethnic minority andfemale students .
The Alliance builds on established collaborations and brings together practicesthat have proven successful individually , to create a unique , comprehensive set of interventions.Objectives and examples of interventions include1 .
The Northwest Alliance will increase the number of students with disabilities pursuingSTEM academic programs and careers .
Interventions Motivational college/career transitionand STEM fairs for precollege students and STEM academic/career activities for collegestudents that identify participants for the AccessSTEM Team in objective 2 interventions.2 .
The Alliance will provide on-going support and encourage high school and collegestudents with disabilities who show interest and aptitude in STEM with peer andmentor interaction , work experiences , and other activities as they transition to college , graduate school , and employment .
Interventions Students join the AccessSTEM Team toengage in an on-line community , mentoring , fields trips , research , paid internships , and otheractivities to assure their success in STEM careers and promote the success of others.3 .
The Alliance will provide precollege educators and staff with strategies , tools andsupport to create more inclusive programs for students with disabilities , where they areencouraged to pursue STEM studies and careers .
Interventions Training and curriculummaterials through established networks of MESA , Educational Services Districts , teachertraining programs , and professional organizations ; provide educators with opportunities towork with students who have disabilities.4 .
The Alliance will help STEM postsecondary faculty , support staff , counselors , andemployers fully include students with disabilities in their courses and programs and createaccessible facilities and electronic resources .
Interventions Opportunities for faculty toreceive training and work with students with disabilities in research ; assistance in makingfacilities , equipment , distance learning , and Web pages accessible.Each intervention is associated with measurables that provide evidence of effectiveness .
TheNational Center on Postsecondary Educational Supports ( NCSPES ) will evaluate projectoutcomes and impacts , conduct research on factors that promote success for students withdisabilities , describe replication models , and help disseminate results.Broader Impacts Resulting from the Northwest AllianceCollaborations with MESA and other programs will broaden the participation of racial/ethnicminorities and females with disabilities in STEM .
Wide distribution of a replication model , curriculummaterials , and other project products and creation of a searchable Knowledge Base on the projectWeb site will enhance scientific and technological understanding and maximize project impact.Project outcomes will benefit society by making STEM opportunities available to all citizens andincreasing the number of STEM professionals and leaders who have disabilities .
0227754Cheatham This award is to the Middle Tennessee State University to support the activity described below for 36 months .
The proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation ( NSF 02060 ) .
The partners include the Middle Tennessee State University ( Lead Institution ) , Austin Peay State University , Tennessee State University , Tennessee Technological University , Vanderbilt University Medical Center , Oakland High School , Riverdale High School , Tennessee Bureau of Investigation , Tennessee Department of Health , Communicable and Environmental ; Disease Services , Tennessee Wildlife Resources Agency , BioVentures Inc , Esoterx Center of Innovative Research , Orchid Cellmark , Tennessee Biotechnology Association .
The program includes establishment of training programs ; provision of equipment and materials ; development of laboratories for teachers to encourage the use of hands-on biotechnology exercises in science curricula ; establishment of internships for teachers to work in the partner companies ; establishment of a seminar course for students and company employees in biotechnology ; and enhancement of biotechnological growth by developing and applying novel sensors in microarray technology.Currently there are more than 50 biotech companies in the region that have started with research done at the regional universities .
This proposed effort will provide the workforce to make and keep these companies competitive in the biotech industry .
It will also provide the workforce for additional jobs created by the regional university research enterprise .
These jobs will have considerably higher salaries than the traditional jobs in the region .
The academic institutions involved serve traditionally underrepresented groups .
In addition minority students will be involved in this effort .
DEB-0227696RenzagliaThis UMEB award will provide financial support and professional assistance for 10 or more undergraduate students , from groups traditionally underrepresented in science , to attend the annual conference of the Botanical Society of America ( BSA ) from 2002 through 2006 .
A mentoring network of undergraduates , graduates and faculty will provide support for career development and will foster socialization of students .
Mentors will help integrate students into conference activities through a series of pre- , during- , and post-meeting activities .
At the conference , mentors will show students around the meeting site , introduce them to professionals , and accompany them to scientific sessions , field trips , workshops , and other events .
Multiple assessments will be conducted to determine if program goals/objectives are being achieved .
A robust plan for recruiting students and mentors will be employed , and it will canvass the entire BSA membership , as well as take advantage of existing professional networks of BSA members and other external professional societies and consortia .
This project represents a significant step by the BSA to attract and retain minority undergraduates to plant biology .
It will help foster the professional growth of minority students , provide a solid mentoring network for students to participate fully in the conferences , and draw more underrepresented minorities into environmental biology disciplines .
This program is an important step towards meeting a national need to strengthen the scientific workforce and to draw upon the full range of intellectual talent from diverse ethnic and minority populations .
The Pacific Northwest National Laboratory is hosting a workshop on June 5 - 6 , 2002 to promote the formation of research partnerships between researchers in designated EPSCoR states and the scientific staff from the Department of Energy ( DoE ) laboratories and facilties .
The workshop is sponsored by the DoE Office of EPSCoR program and is co-sponsored by the National Science Foundation ( NSF ) EPSCoR program .
The primary objective of the workshop is to provide a forum for researchers from the EPSCoR states to 1 ) report advances in EPSCoR-funded research activities , 2 ) update their knowledge of Department of Energy and NSF programs and activities , 3 ) learn about the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory user facilities and research directions , 4 ) explore opportunities for research with Department of Energy scientists , 5 ) develop plans for future research projects and 6 ) learn about DoE laboratory opportunities for training and hands-on research experience for undergraduate , graduate , postdoctoral fellows and new faculty .
In this MSP project , the University of Rochester partners with the Greece , Penfield and Rush-Henrietta School Districts as well as a consortium of twenty-three rural districts through the Genesee Valley Board of Cooperative Educational Services ( GVBOCES ) in an effort to develop effective ways to foster the mathematical content knowledge necessary for a successful implementation of reform mathematics curricula .
The three suburban Rochester districts are in various stages of the adoption and implementation of curricula while the rural districts are in the early stages of a curricular reform process .
Together , the districts in this partnership serve roughly 28,000 students .
Other partners in this work are the Education Development Center , Horizon Research and WestEd.For curricular reform to succeed , the partners believe that multiple constituencies need to be engaged in practices that enhance mathematical knowledge including K-12 teachers and other school support personnel , parents and other influential community members , and mathematicians and mathematics educators who prepare future teachers .
To this end , they will* Offer a series of reform mathematics courses , each focusing on different sets of mathematical concepts addressed by the adopted curricula and targeted to the various constituencies in such a manner that they will experience learning mathematics similar to ways in which students learn the discipline ; * Train teacher leaders to facilitate mathematics case discussions involving in-depth analysis of student thinking ; and* Engage various groups in evening chats about school mathematics reform , with a special emphasis on understanding goals and expectations for student learning of mathematics ; chats will involve different combinations of mathematicians , mathematics educators , K-12 teachers , parents and community members .
Dr. Fiona Goodchild is a cognitive psychologist who is the Education Director of the NSF Materials Research Laboratory ( MRL ) at the University of California at Santa Barbara .
She focuses on a variety of mentoring , research and peer networking activities that impact K-12 , undergraduate and graduate students .
Dr. Goodchild has created an educational process that replicates itself and adapts and continues to grow new scientists .
There is ample evidence that using an advance research laboratory environment to do this kind of education and outreach takes a very creative and talented individual , which has been a hallmark of Dr. Goodchild 's effort .
Plant diseases caused by necrotrophic fungi are of world wide economic importance and result in millions of dollars in crop losses annually .
In contrast to organisms exhibiting a biotrophic lifestyle , necrotrophic fungi actively kill host tissue prior to colonization usually through the secretion of toxic substances .
Necrotrophic diseases are not well controlled by resistant plant cultivars .
Modern fungicides can help to control necrotrophic pathogens , but many consider these chemicals to be both environmentally and economically undesirable .
The ultimate goal of this project is to identify and develop improved disease resistance strategies for these types of fungal pathogens .
This project is focused on the development of an ideal model pathosystem for exploring interactions between plants and necrotrophic fungi .
This pathosystem consists of select species found within the plant family Brassicaceae and the necrotrophic , toxin producing fungus , Alternaria brassicicola .
This project will further our understanding of host-necrotrophic pathogen relationships in Brassicaceae by first identifying a set of ESTs related to a compatible interaction .
A comparative genomics study of pathogen-induced defense responses in resistant and susceptible hosts will be performed using Arabidopsis full-genome microarrays and will give critical insight into the role of specific genes and signaling pathways involved in these responses .
A functional genomics approach using knockout mutatgenesis will be performed to elucidate pathogenicity mechanisms in the fungus .
A publicly accessible database for this information will be created .
This project also includes a major educational component involving an outreach program that will use knowledge and materials obtained from this research as an aid in educating K-12 students about genomics .
This project will provide education and scientific training to undergraduates , graduate students , and postdoctoral scientists and will focus on the inclusion of underrepresented groups .
This is a Small Grants for Exploratory Research ( SGER ) award .
It is in response to the Next Generation Chemical and Biological Sensors and Sensing Systems Dear Colleague letter , NSF-02-112 .
In this project , novel nanostructured fractal and fractal-microcavity sensors will be fabricated .
These sensors are expected to provide unsurpassed sensitivity in optical detection of molecules in minute quantities , including small amounts of biological and chemical agents .
The sensors are based on fractal metal-dielectric composites , which can support various plasmon modes resulting in giant enhancement of optical responses .
Plasmon modes in fractal materials experience localization so that the electromagnetic energy is accumulated and concentrated in nanometer-scale areas , hot spots , leading to the strongly enhanced local fields .
The resonating areas , hot spots , can act as nano-antennas with different resonance frequencies .
Combining the energy-concentrating effects from localized optical excitations in plasmonic nano-resonators with micro-resonators based on dielectric cavities , can result in record-high enhancement of optical phenomena .
This research could lead to new optical sensors with unsurpassed sensitivity .
The proposed research , supported by synergistic activities with Center for Sensing Science and Technology at Purdue will integrate cutting-edge research in sensor science and technology with top-flight education and training .
This is a Small Grants for Exploratory Research ( SGER ) award .
It is in response to the Next Generation Chemical and Biological Sensors and Sensing Systems Dear Colleague letter , NSF-02-112 .
In this project , novel nanostructured fractal and fractal-microcavity sensors will be fabricated .
These sensors are expected to provide unsurpassed sensitivity in optical detection of molecules in minute quantities , including small amounts of biological and chemical agents .
The sensors are based on fractal metal-dielectric composites , which can support various plasmon modes resulting in giant enhancement of optical responses .
Plasmons represent collective oscillations of electrons in metals and metal-dielectric composites and they are known to be a major reason for surface-enhanced spectroscopy , in which plasmonic nanostructures lead to many orders of magnitude increases in the sensitivities of optical spectroscopies .
Plasmon modes in fractal materials experience localization so that the electromagnetic energy is accumulated and concentrated in nanometer-scale areas , hot spots , leading to the strongly enhanced local fields .
Combining the energy-concentrating effects from localized optical excitations in plasmonic fractal modes with micro-resonators based on dielectric cavities can result in record-high enhancement of optical phenomena .
This research can eventually lead to developing new optical sensors with unsurpassed sensitivity .
The research , supported by synergistic activities with the Center for Sensing Science and Technology at Purdue will integrate cutting-edge research in sensor science and technology with top-flight education and training .
This award provides funding for a three year continuing award to support a Research Experiences for Teachers ( RET ) Site , at Northeastern University , entitled , Research Experiences for Teachers-A Program Linked to Urban Schools ( RET-PLUS ) .
This program will be conducted by the Center for the Enhancement of Science and Mathematics Education ( CESAME ) , in collaboration with the Center for Subsurface Sensing and Imaging Systems ( CenSSIS ) , and Engineering Research Center .
The program will provide a six-week summer research experience for ten urban middle and/or high school math and/or science teachers and one undergraduate education student .
99-11894OTUONYEThis unusual five-year Teacher Student Development through Research Experience ( TSD ) project brings together real life miners , research scientists , and teachers in a working mine and inactive mines to participate in mining activities and the associated laboratory research activities surrounding minerals .
In year-one , 24 teachers from the Upper Peninsula of MI will participate in a six-week program that includes content and skills preparation ; working with scientists and engineers , in working and inactive mines , collecting specimens and cataloging them ; and , hone leadership and change agent skills to enhance the transfer of the research/high tech mining experience back to the classroom .
The six-week summer research and field experiences are complemented by professional development activities over a 12-month period .
In years two and three the participant pool will include teachers from neighboring states WI , MN , IN , OH , and IL .
Each year 24 additional middle and high school teachers will participate .
In years four and five teachers will come from a national pool focusing on those regions that have extensive mining activities .
Teachers may earn five ( 5 ) graduate credits from MTU .
Through FOCUS ( Faculty Outreach Collaborations Uniting Scientists , Students and Schools ) , the University of California , Irvine ( UCI ) unites the efforts of mathematics , science , education and research library faculty and staff with educators from local community colleges , school districts and local educational support agencies .
The partnership builds on prior established relationships between UCI and three high-need California school districts Compton Unified , Santa Ana Unified and the Westside of Newport-Mesa Unified .
These schools serve 106,695 students of whom 82 % are Hispanic and 11 % are African American .
The work of FOCUS will include the construction of a future teacher highway to increase the number , quality and diversity of preK-12 teachers of mathematics and science ; involvement of math and science professionals in Discipline Dialogues that cross segmental boundaries , and the creation of systemic reform in the professional development of preK-12 teachers of mathematics and science .
FOCUS will ultimately impact the number of new mathematics and science teachers ; the number of high school students prepared for and enrolled in advanced mathematics and science coursework ; the achievement gap between the general student population and English Language Learners ; and the number of higher education faculty engaged in efforts with preK-12 educational systems .
0227828Ramani This award is to Purdue University to support the activity described below for 24 months .
The proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation ( NSF 02060 ) .
The partners include Purdue University ( Lead Institution ) , Alcoa , Caterpillar , Metal Technologies , GT Automation , Kirby Risk , Lear , Office of Technology Commercialization , Innovation Realization Lab , and WeToollT , 21st Century Research and Technology Fund , Cunningham Pattern & Engineering , American Foundry Association , National Tooling and Manufacturers Association , Indiana Manufacturers Association , Mid-America Plastics Partners , and Central Indiana Corporate Partnership .
The goals of the program include the following ( 1 ) comprehensively integrate industrial tooling marketplace interactions into a streamlined structure and help manage the network using information technology , ( 2 ) use an advanced three-dimensional communication tool that will use and link geometry communication to partner manufacturing firms , and ( 3 ) promotion and use of advanced tools for rapid manufacturing by partnering with state-wide use in the tool and die education programs to enhance the readiness of the workforce .
The program provides an integrated and structured development of the tooling/manufacturing capability for the manufacturing firms in Indiana .
The infrastructure provides a common platform for all types of information exchanges including 3D Computer-Aided Design and Manufacturing that will streamline and improve efficiency in the design to manufacturing cycle .
Faculty of community colleges will be trained in advanced manufacturing technology so they can train the new workforce .
A product informatics system is being developed at Purdue and will be made available to the manufacturing firms in Indiana .
Technical support in rapid tooling , manufacture , and design will be provided to small manufacturing firms in the state .
The program combines information technology with manufacturing technology and education programs that simultaneously develop the manufacturing workforce .
The aim is to increase the efficiency and productivity of the manufacturing sector in Indiana .
This will make the manufacturing sector in Indiana more competitive and contribute to the economic well-being of the region .
Workforce development will provide workers for the growing industry .
Underrepresented groups in technology-businesses will have a greater access to training and jobs in the manufacturing sector .
Sara Young directs the American Indian Research Opportunities program at Montana State University .
Her mentoring is beyond the ordinary , especially when the unusually difficult logistical factors of the work are considered .
In her unique and successful mentoring of students in Montana , she has been able to overcome many challenges , such as the demanding geographic environment .
Young has worked with both students and families to achieve successful outcomes for Native American students .
She has also worked with a coalition to achieve positive results .
The rate of students graduating from her program and going on to attend college is high as a result of Young 's mentoring and of the very positive role model that she poses to Native American students .
0227907Wight This award is to Ohio University to support the activity described below for 36 months .
The proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation ( NSF 02060 ) .
The partners include Ohio University ( Lead Institution ) , Intherthyr Corporation , DiAthegen LLC , GeneBact Biotechnologies , Battelle Memorial Institute , Diagnostic Hybrids Inc , Sen Med Medical Ventures , Athenian Venture Partners , Adena Ventures , Appalachian Regional Commission , Edison BioTechnology Center , Governor 's Office for Appalachia , Governor 's Regional Economic Development Office .
The goals of the program include accelerating and enhancing the growth of the biotechnology sector in southeast Ohio region , accelerating the growth of existing companies and increasing their probability of success , creating the technology pipeline and creating new companies , sustaining the regional cluster , and keeping the companies in the region .
New start-up companies based on intellectual property derived from the Ohio University research programs will be launched and nurtured .
Training of the workforce for the biotech industry is a top priority .
Partnering with existing corporate and other private and public partners will form a strong nucleus to form and retain start-up companies in biotech in the region.The aim of the program is to increase the number of new sources of higher-paying jobs , and to mobilize the underrepresented populations in the region by providing education , research and technology and business support for new start-up biotech companies .
The economy in southeastern Ohio is among the worst in Appalachia .
This award provides funding for the support of a three year continuing Research Experiences for Teachers ( RET ) Site program entitled , Enrichment Experiences in Engineering ( ES3 ) for Teachers Summer Research Program , at Texas A & M University , under the direction of Dr. Karen L. Butler-Purry .
This program will involve a minimum of 15 high school math and/or science teachers annually from Texas Urban System Initiative , Rural Systemic Initiative , and the Comprehensive Partnership for Mathematics and Science Achievement schools in research projects in the College of Engineering .
Feasibility Study of Novel Instrumentation with nN Force ResolutionNSF SGER Proposal submitted to Dr. Jorn Larsen-BasseBy Andreas A. Polycarpou , Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering , UIUC The performance and durability of many devices that experience contact , especially micro/nanodevices is heavily influenced by the surface properties and interfacial phenomena like adhesion , friction and wear .
Research in the areas of friction , adhesion and nanomechanical properties of advanced engineering systems and miniature systems , such as the Head Disk Interface ( HDI ) in magnetic storage and microelectromechanical systems ( MEMS ) , have advanced considerably .
As the size scale of miniature systems shrinks further , finer tolerances are required , surfaces become smoother , thin-films become thinner and phenomena like strong intermolecular adhesion forces , high stiction and catastrophic failures at the interfaces may occur .
Even though many of these problems have been alleviated or resolved , a major issue that remains and will be tackled in this research is the direct force measurementwith extremely low resolution .
The proposed one year exploratory research deals with the co-development and purchase of novel instrumentation capable for direct force measurements with very high resolution of 1 nN .
Current state of the art direct force instruments are capable of 0.5 nN - 1 nN force resolution .
The 3 orders of magnitude improvement in the force resolution will be accomplish by ( a ) Significantly reducing the mass of the current systems from over 200 mg to 20 mg ( using a combination of integrated circuit-IC and MEMS technologies ) .
( b ) Incorporating active vibration cancellation inside the force transducer .
( c ) Improving the drive electronics of the force transducer and actuator to minimize thermal drift .
The proposed instrumentation will then be integrated with an existing multi-mode Atomic Force Microscope ( AFM ) and will be used to perform preliminary interfacial nanoscale experiments to demonstrate the nN force resolution capabilities .
Specifically , two types of experiments will be performed ( a ) iasub nanoindentationl-A experiments for extracting material properties of sub 10 nm ultra thin layers and ( b ) adhesion and pull-off force experiments using isidealln surfaces and actual surfaces from microsystems , e.g. , low flying head-disk interfaces from magnetic storage .
The significance of this research is that it will enable the feasibility of novel direct force measurement instrumentation capable of nN and possibly sub nN resolution and the capability of performing qualitative nanoindentation and adhesion experiments at small scales that were not possible before .
The proposed research is exploratory and high risk due to the novel prototype low mass direct force transducers .
The success of this research will have a great impact on the future of nanoscale testing and nanotribology .
The PI 's background in macrotribology and his approach of applying micro/nano techniques to explain phenomena at multiple length scales , his strong instrumentation background and his strong relation with novel sensor manufacturers , and industrial companies place him in a unique position to develop novel instrumentation capable of nN force resolution and investigate interfacial phenomena and mechanical properties of sub-nm thick layers .
The University of Georgia and the University of Michigan are leading the development of a Center to implement a potentially powerful professional development model for pre-K-16 mathematics education .
The Center will establish a research agenda to examine the nature of the mathematical knowledge that is important to teachers ' proficiency in teaching mathematics , and will use the knowledge gained to strengthen both the pre-service education and the in-service professional development of teachers .
The Center will combine practice , research and professional development to build resources and capacity for the preparation of teachers of mathematics .
The other higher education partners are the University of Michigan-Dearborn and Henry Ford Community College .
School district partners in Georgia are Gwinnett County Public Schools , Morgan County Public Schools and Social Circle city Schools ; and in Michigan , the large Washtenaw Intermediate School District .
Connections are also established with a number of professional mathematics organizations , including the American Mathematical Society and the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics , to enable the Center to collaborate with and support collegiate teachers of mathematics and teacher educators on a broad scale across diverse settings .
Bacterial diseases cause significant losses in many crops , and control measures often are limited or unavailable .
The majority arise from invasion of the vascular system or colonization of the tissue between the veins ( the parenchyma ) .
The major classes of molecular tools that enable bacteria to thrive inside plants are beginning to be understood , but little is known about the functions within the plant of most of these tools .
Less still is known about the plant signals and targets that render plants susceptible .
Virtually nothing is known of the basis for tissue specificity .
An understanding of the pathogen and host traits that create opportunities for microbes to exploit different plant tissues is an important goal .
It will advance our fundamental understanding of plant biology and support innovative efforts to develop strategies to alter plant susceptibility or block pathogen virulenceThis five-year functional genomics project will 1 ) identify plant genes differentially expressed in response to two closely related pathogens of the same host that cause different , representative types of disease ; 2 ) characterize genetic differences between these pathogens which likely play a role ; and 3 ) identify plant genes that affect susceptibility or tissue specificity to the pathogens .
The project is expected to yield key plant molecular targets and signals required for susceptibility and tissue specificity , and key proteins used by bacteria to infect plants in different ways .
Rice ( Oryza sativa ) , an important crop and a model species , will be used for these studies .
Bacterial leaf blight ( vascular ) and bacterial leaf streak ( parenchymal ) will be examined .
These diseases are caused by the two subspecies of Xanthomonas oryzae , pathovar oryzae and pathovar oryzicola , respectively .
Both diseases are threats to US agriculture .
They are also excellent models for the two most common ways bacteria cause disease in plants .
The project will have the following broader impacts .
It will integrate research and education by providing training and teaching experience for graduate students and postdoctoral researchers , and a two-week genomics module for high school biology students .
The project will foster increased participation in science for underrepresented groups through summer internships for undergraduate women and minorities .
The project will produce versatile molecular resources that will be useful in many different aspects of rice ( and other cereal ) biology and in plant bacteriology .
In addition to publication for the scientific community , results will be disseminated to the public through the educational activities of the project , a project website , and other outreach efforts.DeliverablesData will be available online at < a href=www.public.iastate.edu/~ajbog > www.public.iastate.edu/~ajbog < /a > .
Clones , and seed from identified susceptibility mutants will be provided by Bogdanove on request on a cost-return basis .
An important goal of the project is to construct Gateway ( Invitrogen ) cDNA libraries of rice undergoing infection by each pathogen , Gateway libraries of pathogen type III effector genes , and new compatible vectors for expression in pathogenic gram-negative bacteria .
The Gateway system allows easy transfer of clones , in-frame and en masse without loss of representation , to a wide range of expression vectors .
The Gateway rice cDNA library will be provided by Bogdanove < a href=mailtoajbog @ iastate.edu > ajbog @ iastate.edu < /a > or a third party distributor such as the ATCC on a cost-return basis .
The Gateway Xanthomonas effector gene libraries and new destination vectors will be provided by Bogdanove on a cost-return basis .
A team of institutions is developing , organizing , and managing the next stage growth of the core integration ( CI ) capabilities of the National STEM Education Digital Library ( NSDL ) .
Collaborators include UCAR , Cornell University , Columbia University , the University of California at Santa Barbara , the Center for Intelligent Information Retrieval at the University of Massachusetts , the San Diego Supercomputing Center , the Merit Network , and Eastern Michigan University .
The project is bringing together many efforts already underway , and engaging new efforts as well , in support of a comprehensive large-scale digital library expected to enhance every aspect of education in science , mathematics , engineering and technology .
The organizational and technical underpinnings of the proposed work fall into three categories of effort , each within the overall context of educational excellence 1 ) engaging the community , 2 ) providing technology , and 3 ) operating core services .
To promote the vision of a strong NSDL community that sees itself as owning the program and having major influence on the character of the library , the project team is working with all NSDL-funded projects , helping to integrate their work into the library .
Additional partnering with efforts such as those funded by the NSF 's Digital Library Initiative and by the Institute of Museum and Library Services , and independently developed collections and services , is also taking place .
Development and support of models for intellectual property and digital rights management are being undertaken , as well as promotion of a library evaluation framework , administration of an NSDL program advisory group , and development of an overall governance mechanism for the NSDL .
A robust , flexible information technology infrastructure is being implemented based on two themes a spectrum of interoperability and one library , many portals .
The other two awards in this collaborative project are 0227648 and 0227656 .
0227899Calzonetti This award is to the University of Toledo to support the activity described below for 24 months .
The proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation ( NSF 02060 ) .The partners include the University of Toledo ( Lead Institution ) , Bowling Green University , Owens Community College , IQ Systems , First Solar , Cooltech , Dana Corporation , General Motors Corporation , Owens-Corning , Pilkington , Center for Technology Commercialization , EISC , Inc , Regional Technology Alliance , NASA Glenn , Regional Growth Partnership , City of Toledo , COSI-Toledo , and Toledo Zoo.The activities of the program include the following ( 1 ) improvements in the technical skills of the workforce by design of the technical programs at Owens Community College in the area of alternative energies , ( 2 ) participation of African American and Hispanic students from the Toledo EXCEL Program , ( 3 ) promotion of related industrial and business development through support provided by the Regional Growth Partnership and the Regional Technology Alliance , ( 4 ) increased public awareness of alternative energy systems , ( 5 ) development of statewide support through the Ohio Alternative Energy Development Council , ( 6 ) transfer of alternative energy research and technology from the University of Toledo and Bowling Green University to the partner companies.The program will increase academic research on alternative energy systems , develop the energy systems technologies , make innovations in manufacturing of these systems , develop the workforce for these companies , increase the participation of underrepresented populations in alternative energy systems technology , improve the environment from responsible manufacturing and less-polluting energy systems , and promote regional cluster development and increased investment in alternative energy technology.The region of northwest Ohio is in a state of economic depression .
The proposed effort will provide new technologies , new companies , and new jobs .
The creation of new jobs will have a significant impact on the region , which currently has a high unemployment .
Involvement of underrepresented groups in alternative energy technology has obvious societal implications .
In addition , lowered energy costs and environmental improvements from less-polluting energy will have societal benefits .
0227667OrtnerThis one-year award for dissertation enhancement involves US-Ireland cooperative research in ethnology and cultural anthropology .
Under the guidance of her US advisor , Sherry B. Ortner of Columbia University and Irish mentor , Carmel Quinlan of the Centre for Women 's Studies , University College Cork , Jennifer DeWan will explore the effects of rapid social changes augured by European integration and late capitalism on contemporary feminist activism in Ireland .
The objective is to determine if the economic success of the Celtic Tiger , Ireland 's membership in the European Union , secularization and immigration and other factors have dramatically changed the social environment in Ireland .
Using participant observation and ethnographic interviews of the institutions and groups that make up Ireland 's fragmented and diversified women 's movement , the investigator will focus on the methods , spaces and subjects that constitute feminist political practices .
This will be supplemented by textual ethnography , historical and archival research .
The research will take place in Ireland 's two largest cities , Dublin and Cork.NSF will cover travel funds and living expenses for the US graduate student during her one-year residence in Ireland .
The Exploratorium will host an invitational three-day conference on best practices in science exhibition development .
At the conference practitioners will identify best practices in conceiving , designing , managing and developing science exhibitions .
The conference will highlight current issues such as responding to diversity , providing access to current science and balancing the considerations of market and mission .
The ideas and issues raised at this conference will culminate in a publication for dissemination to the field that includes conference proceedings as well as interviews with and essays by practicing exhibition professionals This award provides funding for a three year continuing award to support a Research Experiences for Teachers ( RET ) Site , at Drexel University , entitled , Research Experience for Teachers in Areas of Innovative and Novel Technologies in Philadelphia ( RETAIN Technologies in Philadelphia ) .
The program will provide a five-week summer research experience for eighteen urban middle and/or high school science teachers from the Philadelphia school systems and Camden County , New Jersey .
0227729Beal This award is to the University of Maine at Machias to support the activity described below for 36 months .
The proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation ( NSF 02060 ) .
The partners include the University of Maine at Machias ( Lead Institution ) , Downeast Institute for Applied Marine Research & Education , Sunrise County Economic Council , Eastern Maine Development Corporation , Town of Bealls , Carver Shellfish Inc , Washington County Commissioners , Maine Aquaculture Innovation Center , Cobscook Bay Resource Center , The Nature Conservatory , Maine Department of Marine Resources , Maine State Planning Office , and Maine Science & Technology Foundation .
The goals of the program are to produce a significant increase in applied marine research and technology transfer leading to commercialization of products and processes , and to increase the numbers of people from eastern Maine enrolled in associate and baccalaureate degree programs at the University of Maine at Machias preparing them for the new workforce in marine technologies .
To accomplish these goals new faculty positions will be created in the areas of marine ecology , marine biology , and natural resource economics .
Research facilities for marine research will be installed .
Positions for managers to enable technology transfer and commercialization are being established at the university.More than 40 % of the households in the region have incomes less than $ 20,000 annually .
The economy of the region relies very heavily on renewable marine resources .
Marine aquaculture has a huge potential to revitalize the regional economy given increased research and education/training to provide the technological and business support as well as the trained workforce for start-up companies .
The participation of underrepresented minority students in the program will be increased through several currently existing programs , such as Alliance for Minority Participation Program , McNair Scholars Program , Bridges to the Baccalaureate Program , and affiliate programs with the University of Puerto Rico .
This research project will conduct two complementary studies that focus on generational technology change at both industry and organization levels of analysis .
One will analyze an important , common , but neglected kind of innovation , where several generations of product technology co-exist in a market .
The hypotheses to be tested will illuminate how multiple generations affect the emerging variety of firms and patterns of competition over time and help explain why such markets are heterogeneous .
The tests use hazard-rate estimation and other event-history methods and inclusive archival data for US software products and their developer firms over 10 years .
A complementary study at INSEAD of the European software market , funded separately from NSF , enables comparative and joint analysis .
Still , this study ignores ways that individual firms adapt to generational technological change .
Firm-level adaptation is important to theory of organizational innovation and to improving managers ' capabilities to cope with complex , turbulent markets .
Therefore the second complementary study will be of change inside a firm covering the same products and time period using case studies to describe in-depth the evolution of organizational forms and strategies .
The cases highlight co-evolution with technology and the market of organizational units , product-line scope , firm boundaries , and dynamic capabilities .
They are developed with the funding and cooperation of a corporate partner , Microsoft Corporation .
Both studies are theoretically linked to evolutionary theory , technology change , and organizational theory literatures .
Both are preceded by technical analysis of software product-technology and its evolution .
Together , these complementary projects will produce more complete prescriptions for managers and researchers and make strong contributions to theory and management of innovation .
Functional logic ( FL ) programming languages provide severaladvantages over declarative languages based on either functions orpredicates only .
A narrowing engine is an essential component ofFL languages .
Narrowing engines available to date are allprototypical and almost universally incomplete .
The goal of thisresearch is the design and development of a general , efficient andcomplete narrowing engine for FL languages.This research will define both internal and externalrepresentations of executable FL programs -- -the latter in XML.This approach will decouple the frontends of different compilersand interpreters of FL languages from the narrowing engine .
Thisseparation will enable frontends for different languages to usethe same backend .
By contrast to other contemporary researchefforts , the proposed narrowing engine will map narrowingcomputations to computations in an imperative language .
Theinternal representation of the executable code will be athin-layer bytecode over the mapping of narrowing computations tocomputations in an imperative language .
This approach promises agood efficiency without sacrificing tasks , such as tracing , debugging and profiling , that are more easily implemented in aninterpreter .
An integral part of the implementation will be arun-time environment for using the narrowing engine in the backendof a compiler/interpreter of FL languages .
This is a grant funded through the Information Technology Research ( ITR ) initiative .
The award is to a predominantly undergraduate institution .
Time-of-flight neutron scattering experiments provide important insights into the structure and dynamics of materials .
These experiments are critical for academic and applied research and are carried out at a small number of advanced research facilities around the world , including the Intense Pulsed Neutron Source ( IPNS ) Division at Argonne National Laboratory ( ANL ) .
To utilize these resources effectively , this project will develop a freely available , platform-independent , Java-based system for access , visualization and analysis of neutron scattering data .
Initial work has already been undertaken .
The result of this initial work is an Integrated Spectral Analysis Workbench ( ISAW ) .
ISAW is , in principle , applicable to data from a wide variety of sources and is extensible by users of the system both through plug-in operators written in Java and through a basic scripting language .
The system provides some highly interactive visualizations , analyses and transformations of neutron scattering data in real time for some instrument types.The current project will add important new capabilities to ISAW .
Single crystal diffractometers that utilize multiple area detectors and LPSD 's to obtain volumes of data as a function of time-of-flight pose unique problems .
There is a large amount of data and the data is not regularly gridded .
These problems are exacerbated when the data is mapped into Q-space or reciprocal space .
This project will construct operators and 3-D viewers that allow scientists to view , select and manipulate data from such instruments in scientifically meaningful spaces.In addition , the project will add interactive data modeling and extensive data access capabilities to ISAW .
Specifically , access to raw time-of-flight event data and data from ancillary equipment will be added .
Support for importing and exporting data will be extended to the file formats NeXus , XML , and some site-specific formats from other neutron facilities.This is a grant funded through the Information Technology Research ( ITR ) initiative .
The award is to a predominantly undergraduate institution .
Time-of-flight neutron scattering experiments provide important insights into the structure and dynamics of materials .
These experiments are critical for academic and applied research and are carried out at a small number of advanced research facilities around the world , including the Intense Pulsed Neutron Source ( IPNS ) Division at Argonne National Laboratory ( ANL ) .
To utilize these resources effectively , this project will develop a freely available , platform-independent , Java-based system for access , visualization and analysis of neutron scattering data .
Initial work has already been undertaken .
The result of this initial work is an Integrated Spectral Analysis Workbench ( ISAW ) .
ISAW is , in principle , applicable to data from a wide variety of sources and is extensible by users of the system both through plug-in operators written in Java and through a basic scripting language .
The system provides some highly interactive visualizations , analyses and transformations of neutron scattering data in real time for some instrument types.The current project will add important new capabilities to ISAW .
Single crystal diffractometers that utilize multiple area detectors and LPSD 's to obtain volumes of data as a function of time-of-flight pose unique problems .
There is a large amount of data and the data is not regularly gridded .
These problems are exacerbated when the data is mapped into Q-space or reciprocal space .
This project will construct operators and 3-D viewers that allow scientists to view , select and manipulate data from such instruments in scientifically meaningful spaces.In addition , the project will add interactive data modeling and extensive data access capabilities to ISAW .
Specifically , access to raw time-of-flight event data and data from ancillary equipment will be added .
Support for importing and exporting data will be extended to the file formats NeXus , XML , and some site-specific formats from other neutron facilities .
Software is multidimensional ; it has many representations besides theprogram source .
These include formal specifications , test suites , documentation and even the development history .
As software evolves , these dimensions must stay consistent and reflect each other asthoroughly as possible .
In practice , however , while these are usuallyconsistent when first created , they tend to receive unequal attentionand therefore gradually become inconsistent .
Programmers thustypically rely on the source code to the exclusion of most otherdimensions.This project 's goal is to help programmers cope with softwareevolution by viewing the dimensions of software as constraints on oneanother .
The project proposes a constraint representation common tothe different software dimensions .
Software evolution then becomes aprocess of maintaining consistency between constraints .
Theseconstraints also help programmers identify high-level features intheir system , and generate rationales to document design decisions.The escalating costs of software maintenance give the projectimmediacy and its results high significance .
It will have immediateimpact by developing tools for programmers to use .
It will haveeffect over the long term by employing these tools in educationalsettings so future developers have a better appreciation for theimportance of maintaining the multiple dimensions of software .
0218192Sawyer & ThiawThis award supports a three-year collaborative research project between Ms. Karyn Sawyer , with the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research ( UCAR ) , Dr. Wassila Thiaw , with UCAR 's African Desk at the National Center for Environmental Prediction ( NCEP ) , and Dr. Saidou Sall , with the Laboratorie de Physique de l'Atmosphere of the Ecole Superieure Polytechnique at the University of Dakar in Senegal .
They will study the interannual variability of African waves and influence on Sahel precipitation .
African waves are inherent components of the West Africa monsoon system .
They start from the African interior , and as they multiply and move westward mesoscale convective systems ( MCSs ) often form and develop within the waves .
These waves are most active during July and August .
This is also the period of active convective rains in the Sahel .
But little is known about the interannual variability of the waves or how they influence the interannual variability of rainfall in the Sahel .
In order to determine the influence of the African waves on Sahel rainfall variability , the investigators will consider the relationship between the number of African waves and the amount of Sahel precipitation , the relationship between the number of African waves and the position and intensity of the Intertropical Convergence Zone ( ITCZ ) , and whether the African waves and the position of the ITCZ modulate Sahel rainfall .
They will use NCEP-UCAR data , satellite imagery , and field data obtained from observation studies .
A convective index will be derived for each time step to determine the characteristics associated with the life cycle of the MCSs .
Statistical analyses will then be performed to investigate the relationship between the number of African waves and Sahel precipitation .
The results are expected to advance the current understanding of the West African monsoon system , especially the contribution of the interannual variability in the African waves to Sahel precipitation variability .
It should advance our understanding of how large scale climate systems interact with local scale phenomena .
It combines the international project expertise of Ms. Sawyer , with Dr. Thiaw 's expertise in estimating rainfall and climate prediction in West Africa , and Dr. Sall 's knowledge about convective systems .
Distributed denial of service ( DDOS ) attacks have emerged as a prevalent way to take down web sites and have imposed financial losses to companies .
The CSI/FBI survey ( CSI 2001 ) shows that 36 % of respondents in the last 12-months period have detected denial of service , which imposed more than $ 4.2 million financial losses .
The effectiveness of DDOS defenses depends on many factors such that the nature of the network 's topology , the specific attack scenario , and various characteristics of the network routers .
However , little research has focused on the tradeoffs inherent in this complex system .
The researchers are developing a computational testbed to study security policies and the associated technologies that provide defenses against DDOS attacks .
The researchers are using this framework to evaluate various policies and technologies .
Out model and the ensuing analyses are informed by research in the areas of computer science , information science , organizational theory and social networks.There have been a number of proposals on how to control the on-going DDOS attack traffic .
None have been widely deployed .
The effectiveness of DDOS defenses depends on many factors , such as the type of network topology , the type of attacks and whether all ISPs are compliant in establishing defenses .
However , little is known about the interactions among these factors .
Knowing what tradeoffs will occur as these factors vary will enable stakeholders to make more informed security policy decisions in which they adjust for the chance that others may not make the same decisions .
Our research illuminates these tradeoffs .
Moreover , the computational model the researchers are building enables the user to examine the tradeoffs associated with various DDOS defenses and attack scenarios at the router level.The researchers focus on two basic research questions .
First , how do ISPs provide DDOS defenses at the lowest cost while their subscribers remain satisfied with the availability of network connections during attacks ?
A cost-performance analysis of the effectiveness of DDOS defenses is being conducted using results from the computational model .
This cost-performance analysis will aid ISPs and local network administrators in their evaluation of DDOS defenses .
Second , the researchers ask where are the critical points in a network to deploy defenses ?
The researchers examine the impact of network topology on the deployment location of defenses .
Graph level indices and models from social network studies will be used to categorize network topologies and to select deployment locations for defenses .
This analysis will provide guidance to decision makers.Benefits of this work research include The policy framework the researchers are developing will help ISPs and subscribers to consider the benefits of providing DDOS defenses and to realize the tradeoffs in DDOS defenses .
Results from this study will enable decision makers to make more informed security policy decisions for computer networks .
It is costly and unethical to conduct real world experiments of DDOS attacks on large networks .
This research will provide a cost effective and ethical means for evaluating various attack scenarios and defenses .
Further , topological measures developed in this research should be useful for studies of other large-scale topologies .
As such , this work extends social network measures typically used on small person-to-person networks to large-scale computer networks .
Finally , this research provides a theoretical basis for evaluating DDOS defenses building on interdisciplinary studies from the fields of computer science , information science , organizational theory and social network analysis .
This Small Grant for Exploratory Research ( SGER ) is a 12 months study to develop new theoretical ideas about the processes through which firms evolve their dynamic capabilities .
The study will contribute to the emerging body of work on the dynamic capabilities in two ways a ) by examining the role of managerial knowledge structures in shaping a firm 's dynamic capabilities and their development and b ) by comparing the effects of differential environmental change ( e.g. , rate and predictability ) on the process of capability development.In conducting the proposed research the teams will take advantage of a naturally occurring experiment created by the terrorists attacks of September 2001 .
The large-scale dramatic change created by the events of September 11th will enable the research team to determine the impact of such change on the evolution of firms ' capabilities .
The study focuses on two industries - defense and biotechnology -- that were both dramatically affected by the events of September 11th , yet have been characterized traditionally by different rates and types of change .
The team will utilize a qualitative approach and rely primarily on an interview methodology to assess the processes of capability development in participating divisions of defense companies and biotechnology firms .
The results of the study will be communicated through a series of company briefings , as well as publications in academic journals .
This proposal describes a set of new techniques for managing access to remote files in the wide area .
The vehicle for evaluating these techniques will be a wide-area file system called MoteFS .
MoteFS will provide fast , flexible , and secure access to remote files over untrusted wide-area networks .
In more detail , the following mechanisms and policies will be investigated- fine-grained namespace mechanisms that allow namespaces to be efficiently and securely added , mutated , transferred and deleted at granularities from single files to millions of files.- decomposable credentials , which allow credential holders to locally derive and transfer weaker credentials without contacting file owners.- a cross-server versioning abstraction , which allows correlated versions of a group of files to be referenced even if they span multiple users and file systems.- client-side differencing , which allows redundant data to be eliminated during network writebacks.- wide-area prefetching and caching algorithms.The combined effect of these techniques will allow allow users to interact with their files in a flexible , secure , location-independent manner .
Research AbstractPROPOSAL NO .
0218668INSTITUTION PA St U University ParkNSF PROGRAM DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROLPRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR Trethewey , Martin W.TITLE Development of Force-Frequency Shifting for Low Frequency Structural Vibration TestingExperimental vibration testing of civil and architectural systems is useful for addressing a number of issues including ; assessment of structural health ( degradation of bridges ) , and reduction of troublesome oscillatory motion in buildings for sensitive installations such as medical MRIs in hospitals and electron microscopes .
The testing of these systems requires that a high amplitude force excitation be applied at very low frequencies ( 0.1 - 10 Hz ) , which is inherently very difficult to accomplish .
The research program is focused on developing a new technique , referred to as Force Frequency Shifting ( FFS ) , to provide such an excitation .
The FFS technique is based on the application of a high amplitude , high frequency force ( at frequency fz ) to a structure in a spatially time variant fashion ( at frequency fx ) .
The nonlinear dynamic behavior of the system produces an excitation at a sum and difference ( fz+fx , and fz-fx ) of the force and spatial motion frequencies .
Of particular interest for low frequency vibration testing , is the difference frequency component ( fz-fx ) .
It is the innate ability of the FFS technique to create this low frequency component that is the focus of the project .
The research will develop an FFS exciter with a computer-controlled array of variable stiffness actuators .
This development will increase the low frequency force performance and control making the FFS suitable for vibration testing of the targeted systems .
0218126ThatchenkeryThis award provides travel support for a delegation of senior and junior scientists to the US-India Workshop Learning from the Indian Development Experience , Bangalore , November 2002 .
US PI Tojo Thatchenkery , Department of Social & Organizational Learning , George Mason University ( GMU ) and Chiranjib Sen , School of Public Policy , Indian Institute of Management ( IIM ) , Bangalore are co-organizers of this workshop .
This gathering of scholars from a range of disciplines will focus on India 's development experience , particularly as related to the emerging Information and Communication Technology ( ICT ) industry .
The assumption is that the Indian development model is different from other national development success stories such as for Japan , Korea , Taiwan , Singapore , and Hong Kong .
The workshop will contribute to fuller understanding of India 's innovation-led development ( private sector ) model and its applicability to other developing countries .
The workshop will foster Indo-US collaboration and create a collaborative program between GMU and the IIM 's School of Public Policy , which will study policy implications of ICT for India 's globalization efforts .
The proceedings of the workshop will be published .
Funding for this workshop is provided jointly by the Office of International Science and Engineering and the Division of Social and Economic Sciences .
EIA-0218563Christopher D. MooreUniversity of New MexicoCollaborative Research Quantum Mote Carlo Algorithms and ComplexityThis collaborative project with the University of Connecticut is exploring both new quantum algorithmic techniques and tools for proving impossibility results for quantum computation .
Specifically , the focus is on quantum Monte Carlo algorithms , which try to solve problems by doing a random walk in the space of possible solutions .
In addition , fundamental limits on the power of quantum computation , developing impossibility results for quantum circuits is being explored and proving that simple generalizations of Shor 's factoring algorithm will not work for the Graph Isomorphism problem , which along with Factoring is a likely candidate for a quantum algorithm.Specifically , quantum walks ( unitary analogues of stochastic processes ) on various combinatorial structures by employing both Fourier analysis for groups and new tools suited for less symmetric Spaces is being studied .
Cases where quantum walks explore the space more quickly than their classical counterparts , and other cases where they become localized and mix more slowly than a classical walk are being explored .
In addition Fourier analysis to develop lower bounds for shallow quantum circuits and information-theoretic bounds on the process of sampling from the quantum Fourier transform are being studied .
In particular , the quantum Fourier transform over non-Abelian groups , and hidden subgroup and hidden subspace problems for such groups is being investigated .
This is closely related to Graph Isomorphism , and explore tractable special cases while showing it is hard for a Shor-type algorithm in general .
We propose to investigate the problem of routing and wavelength assignment ( RWA ) in optical data networks .
This problem is widely viewed as critically important for increasing the efficiency of wavelength-routed all-optical networks .
Mathematically , this problem contains an important special case the problem of routing in circuit switched networks.We propose several novel optimization problem formulations that offer the promise of radical improvements over the existing methods , which are mainly heuristic in character .
Our work aims to use a blend of analysis and algorithmic development to obtain a better understanding of RWA , and to develop efficient and practical methods for computing optimal or near-optimal RWA and circuit switching policies under realistic assumptions.We plan to address the problem using two types of methodology stochastic optimization , based on dynamic programming ( DP ) , and deterministic optimization , based on linear programming ( LP ) .
There is some methodological coupling between the two types of methodology , because the deterministic methodology can be used to obtain cost-to-go approximations , which can in turn be used as the basis for an approximate DP method.In the framework of a stochastic model , we allow a dynamic and stochastically varying demand of the network resources , and a decision-making mechanism that is forward-looking and takes into account the cost of blocking future lightpath requests .
This resulting optimization models are of the DP type , but typically can not be solved exactly because of high dimensionality .
We propose to address such problems using approximations and neuro-dynamic programming ( NDP ) , a recent methodology that has been used to address challenging DP problems.In the framework of a deterministic model , we propose a new integer/linear programming formulation .
The salient feature of our approach , which distinguishes it from similar approaches proposed in the literature , is that it does not require the time-consuming and uninsightful machinery of mixed integer programming .
We have shown this for some practically useful ring network topologies , and we propose further investigation and extension of our methodology to more general topologies .
This is a pleasantly surprising circumstance , and offers the promise of spectacular improvements over the current state of the art .
We plan to investigate and develop algorithms that may be used during the design or reconfiguration of a network , as well as during its on-line operation .
We also plan to explore ways to use the deterministic linear programming methodology in the stochastic/dynamic context and in combination with the NDP methodology .
In many imaging applications , mobile agents -- such as untethered reconnaissance robots and micro air vehicles -- transmit and receive bandwidth-intensive image data over wireless networks .
A key issue in developing small , mobile agents is minimizing their power requirements .
The most significant source of power dissipation in a wireless communications system is the transmission of data over the wireless link .
Compressing the data before transmission is a direct way to significantly decrease power requirements ; thus , effective image compression algorithms are critical to realizing a mobile , wireless , real-time , high quality imaging system.Various hardware platforms can be considered for mobile computing .
Of these platforms , field programmable gate arrays ( FPGAs ) are the most compelling for wireless , mobile , fast , low-power , handheld/wearable/embedded , image compression devices .
FPGAs can be used as the basis for implementations that are low cost , easily updated , and significantly faster than microprocessor-based implementations.The objective of this project is twofold to design new , efficient image compression algorithms and to design , build , demonstrate and evaluate FPGA implementations of state-of-the-art image compression systems .
Our close-knit interdisciplinary team of image compression and hardware specialists will allow for end-to-end system performance analysis .
This critical assessment is almost never performed and yet it is important to understanding the combined effects of algorithmic and implementation design choices.In addition , two or three real-world interdisciplinary projects that can be utilized in senior-level digital signal processing and digital design classes will be designed and published .
EIA-0218435Meera SitharamUniversity of Florida Virus-Inspired Declarative Geometric ComputationThe goal of the project is to develop geometric computational models and tools for virus assembly from their constituent proteins , and virus crystal packing .
Furthermore , inspiration of the above processes is being used to rethink computationally tractable declarative geometry ( DG ) , defined as the intuitive , constraint-based representation and efficient realization of composites of simple interacting geometric objects , starting from a declarative specification of the composite 's properties .
In particular , a new game-theoretic constraint model is being developed for the underlying class of algebraic-geometric computations and corresponding algebraic varieties .
Existing software in the form of the PI 's geometric constraint solver FRONTIER is forming the base for implementing the new computational framework .
The new virus computational models is used for the studying the following unanswered questions on carefully chosen , geometrically significant viruses ( a ) the isolation of crucial geometric events during assembly ( helpful for disrupting assembly ) ; ( b ) the isolation of assembly events - such as molecular conformational changes - that require the involvement of viral genomic material , ( helpful for understanding DNA-protein interactions ) ; and ( c ) the isolation of key geometric events during virus crystallization ( as an idealized version of molecular crystallization ) .The new DG virus models is being refined and validated by checking consistency with known behavior of viruses and their constituent proteins during assembly and crystallization .
A small number of other highly focused experiments ; selective X-ray crystallography and/or cryoelectron microscopy is being performed .
As a significant player to help with both of the above goals , use the distinctive Maize-streak virus ( MSV ) will be used , whose structure and properties are particularly suited to goals of the project .
A comparison of the new geometric virus models with other geometry-based computational virus models is being made .
ITR/AP\ ( EAR ) Collaborative Research Web tools for global time scale development an example from the Pennsylvanian-Cisuralian\ ( Early Permian\ ) ( EAR-0218799 ) Vladimir Davydov , C. J. Northrup , Tamra SchiappaBoise State UniversityABSTRACTWeb Tools for Global Time Scale Development an Example from the Pennsylvanian-Cisuralian ( Early Permian ) is an information technology project that deals with the development of the geologic time scale .
The geologic time scale is a fundamental tool of Earth Science research .
The correlation of global events and the calculation of rates of processes during Earth 's history all depend directly on the accuracy and precision of the geologic time scale .
These processes include , for example , the rates and causes of extinction , climate change , plate motions , and mountain building .
Despite its critical role , portions of the time scale have not been formally defined .
The focus of this project will be twofold 1 ) to develop a method that will serve as a model for international discussion and agreement on the development of a complete time scale , and 2 ) to use a particular part of the time scale that is presently undefined , as an example of how to achieve this goal .
Specifically , PIs will develop Web-based tools that will facilitate the international debate for establishment of the Pennsylvanian and Early Permian stage boundary definitions , and that will serve as a permanent resource for the data utilized for these definitions .
This tool will allow all interested workers to easily enter and extract a wide variety of data from a system that is global in extent .
The time scale is based on the succession of fossils that are preserved in the stratigraphic record , and therefore , these data will include a wealth of information on paleontology and biostratigraphy .
The ability to interact with these data and other researchers over the Internet will help resolve issues about the terminology for specific species , and hence remove fundamental road blocks to international agreement .
The system must also accommodate information about the stratigraphy - the architecture of the succession of sedimentary rocks - that are the hosts for the fossil record .
It must also include so-called absolute ages of rocks based on radiometric dating .
Various geochemical , paleomagnetic and other data must be included to form a true systems approach to building the time scale .
By combining these and other data types into a single system , PIs hope to be able to , for the first time , develop a reliable approach to the development of the geologic time scale .
In this ITR-Small project funded by the Chemistry Division , Stephen Leone of the University of California-Berkeley will investigate single and multiple qubit operations on pairs of superposition states formed among rotational , vibrational , and electronic degrees of freedom in diatomic molecules .
Using multiple pulse sequences from ultrafast lasers , phase and amplitude pulse shaping , and evolutionary algorithms , optimal pulses will be determined for single qubit transformations in molecules , such as Z-gates and Hadamard transformations .
The work is further extended to multiple qubit operations such as controlled-Z and swap gates .
Lithium dimers will be used as the molecular system for these studies .
The experiments in this project will address for the first time the use of molecular rotational states as a motional control qubit for controlled transformations of an electronic qubit.This project focuses on exploring logic gates that may be useful for constructing a quantum computer .
In the course of this research students will receive training in quantum mechanics and the use of ultrafast lasers and pulse shaping .
Since these areas are already of great relevance to optical communications and optical computing efforts , the students will experience the integration of basic science and its applications in advanced information technology applications .
In addition , what is learned from molecular systems may enable the formation of qutrits ( three-level systems ) and multi-qubits ( superpositions of many levels at a time ) that will broaden thinking about potential algorithms for quantum information processing .
This research has other possible applications to areas such as quantum cryptography and code-breaking , information storage and retrieval , and faster processing with quantum computing .
Fields affected include fiber optic communications , information transmission , and data encryption .
ITR Spatio-Temporal Complexity and Non-Linear Dynamics of Coastal Ocean FlowsRoger M. Samelson , John S. Allen , Gary D. EgbertOregon State UniversityThe spatio-temporal complexity and non-linear dynamics of coastal ocean flows will be studied using methods adapted from recent work on the non-linear dynamics of low-dimensional systems .
Stable and unstable periodic or approximately periodic solutions of a three-dimensional , numerical coastal ocean circulation model with realistic bottom topography and oscillatory atmospheric forcing will be computed and their dynamics analyzed .
The linear stability and disturbance growth properties of these solutions will be studied using Floquet theory , optimal disturbance , and Lyapunov vector analyses .
Applications toward ensemble forecasting methods for coastal ocean circulation will be explored .
This research is expected to yield substantial new insights into the nonlinear dynamics and inherent predictability of the coastal ocean system .
EIA-0218256Wendell LimUniversity of California- San FranciscoEngineering Protein-Based Logic GatesLiving cells use protein-based signal transduction circuits to decide how to respond to environmental stimuli .
In eukaryotic cells these signaling networks are organized in a hierarchical , component-based manner -- they are assembled from multiple interacting proteins , while individual proteins are assembled from combinations of a finite toolkit that includes catalytic domains ( e.g .
kinases , phosphates ) and protein interaction domains .
Current hypotheses suggests that complex cellular circuitry may have evolved through recombination of these protein domain components .
The overall goal of this project is to exploit this framework to engineer novel protein-based sensors , circuits , and computational devices .
The initial focus is on individual signaling proteins that function as input/output switches , analogous to the fundamental logic gates used to build complex electronic circuits .
The proteins often have an output activity that is only triggered by a specific set of upstream inputs .
Recent studies suggest that these regulatory properties result from a relatively simple mechanism in which the interplay of intra- and intermolecular domain interactions controls protein conformation and therefore activity .
In this project domain recombination is being used to reprogram natural catalytic activities ( e.g .
acting nucleators , kinesis , phosphates ) such that they are precisely controlled by a combination of selected molecular inputs ( e.g .
specific peptide ligands , phosphorylation/dephosphorylation ) .
Targeted switch designs include AND , NAND , NOR , and XOR-type input/output relationships .
If successful , this project will allow for engineering of complex cell-based sensors .
With National Science Foundation support , Dr. Paul Thacker and colleagues will conduct three seasons of geological and archaeological fieldwork in three different regions of Portugal Estremadura , Ribatejo , and Alentejo .
The interdisciplinary team includes Portuguese and American specialists assembled to investigate regional differences in flaked stone tools during the Magdalenian period , ca .
15,000 years ago .
Changing environmental conditions at the very end of the Pleistocene make the Magdalenian especially interesting and appropriate for examining the articulation of prehistoric technology with hunter gatherer subsistence and settlement strategies .
Untangling the meaning of stone artifact assemblage variability requires understanding the situational environment in which prehistoric tools were made and used .
This project is of broad archaeological interest because each of the three study areas is characterized by different stone raw material types , abundances , and sizes .
For example , high-quality , large chert cobbles were exploited throughout the Paleolithic in the Rio Maior region , in contrast to the Sor drainage which lacks chert sources but has abundant quartz and quartzite gravels .
Comprehensive sampling and statistical description of these different raw material deposits will provide the context within which Magdalenian foragers generated stone tool assemblages .
Four Upper Paleolithic open air campsites will be excavated to obtain large lithic assemblages with associated radiometric dates , two in the Alcobertas valley and two in the Sor valley .
Intrasite spatial analysis of three-dimensionally plotted occupation levels will determine the impact of post depositional processes and the degree to which site assemblages are functionally-comparable analytical units .
This sampling strategy will provide at least one Early Magdalenian and one Late Magdalenian assemblage in each region , facilitating chronological comparison as well as regional ones between the valleys and numerous Magdalenian assemblages previously published from the Rio Maior vicinity .
Laboratory analyses and refitting studies of excavated flaked stone assemblages will explore variability at the site and regional level .
The organization of stone tool technology , transport decisions and artifact use lives will be compared and contrasted across the three regions .
Paleoenvironmental data will be obtained through charcoal-wood species determination while residue and use wear studies will contribute to the functional interpretation of site assemblages.This research is important for several reasons .
Planned archaeological fieldwork will provide new data on the Stone Age occupation of two previously unresearched regions of Iberia .
The comparative approach of this project will investigate the numerous behaviors that result in Portuguese Magdalenian lithic variability , possibly revealing stone acquisition and reduction behaviors that are social rather than functional in origin .
Results will have theoretical and methodological significance for archaeologists working in other geographic regions and chronological periods , especially researchers exploring the interface of hunter-gatherer technological organization and raw material exploitation with subsistence and settlement strategies .
ABSTRACTProposal 0218966New Directions for Multilevel Spatial Analysis in the Social SciencesStephen RaudenbushUniversity of Michigan Research has long documented that risks and opportunities vary systematically over space and time .
Just as poverty , residential instability , and home ownership are concentrated in certain sections of cities , so too are social disorder , crime , and violence as well as infant mortality , low birth weight , and accidents .
Rates of crime and other outcomes surge and decline with time , and some neighborhoods are more strongly affected by these changes than are other neighborhoods .
To examine how neighborhoods affect a variety of outcomes and how these effects change over time , this study will develop a method of statistical analysis that combines multilevel and spatial models .
Four aims organize the proposed work 1 ) to incorporate a spatial auto-regressive process into the now-standard two-level hierarchical linear model ; 2 ) to elaborate this model to include repeated measures on participants ; 3 ) to incorporate repeated measures at the neighborhood level ; and 4 ) to exploit spatial dependence in order to improve the reliability and validity of measures of neighborhood social process .
Predictive validity will be assessed using data from thc Project on Human Development in Chicago Neighborhoods ( PHDCN ) , which conducted a citywide neighborhood study in 1995 and will complete a replication of ' this study in 2002 .
Methods will also be illustrated with PHDCN data on 6000 young people growing up in those neighborhoods between 1995 and 2002 .
Software to implement the proposed methods will be tested through simulation studies before being distributed publicly.The multilevel aspect of the model expresses the notion that urban space is divided into uniquely defined , more or less contiguous , self-contained neighborhoods , often bounded by railroad tracks , major arteries , parks , or industrial districts .
The spatial aspect of the model reflects theory and empirical evidence suggesting that neighborhoods , while somewhat distinct , are not independent .
Rather , neighborhood social processes spill over into surrounding neighborhoods .
The model thus represents the view that neighborhoods are socially meaningful units that are linked spatially .
Using the proposed methods , it will be possible to study not only how the social composition and processes in each neighborhood are related to human development but also how the composition and processes in surrounding neighborhoods affect the development of persons within a given neighborhood .
G. Tong ZhouGeorgia Tech Research CorpA major challenge in wireless communications is that the channel changes , sometimes rapidly ; thus channel state information needs to be acquired frequently before the symbol recovery stage .
Two prevalent approaches for channel estimation are training based and self-recovering ( i.e. , blind ) ones .
Pilot symbol assisted modulation ( PSAM ) is a popular training method , in which known pilots are periodically inserted into the symbol stream prior to transmission .
These pilot symbols occupy time slots and impose a recurring transmission overhead .
Blind approaches on the other hand , are completely data-driven with no loss of information rate but a significant increase in complexity .
For fast fading channels , blind algorithms may require too many data to converge or converge too slowly to be practical.This research investigates a class of superimposed training algorithms that combine the best of both worlds .
Instead of inserting pilots as in PSAM , known periodic pilots are superimposed onto the symbol stream , prior to waveform modulation .
The channel estimation algorithm may appear to be blind , but is superior to blind approaches because simple first-order , and no more than second-order statistical methods , are used for channel estimation .
The superimposed training approach can also be viewed as a watermarking technique with the pilot sequence serving as the marker .
It is shown to be applicable to a variety of wireless channels frequency selective , time selective , and doubly selective fading channels , as well as nonlinear channels .
Issues investigated include trade-offs among bit error rate , transmission power , information rate and capacity , as well as optimization of pilot strength , transmission power allocation , and the effect of the added pilots on nonlinear power amp ! lifiers .
EIA-0218441Navin KhanejaHarvard UniversityTime Optimal Control of Quantum Information Processing SystemsTime optimal control of quantum mechanical systems can significantly minimize decoherence effects in coherent manipulation of quantum pheonomenon .
The central theme of the project is to develop a mathematical theory for optimal unitary control of quantum networks .
Network of coupled two level quantum systems form the benchmark for a quantum computer .
Finding the minimum time it takes to produce a desired unitary evolution in a network of coupled quantum systems is of fundamental practical importance not just in the field of quantum information processing but the whole field of coherent spectroscopy .
In particular , focus is on optimal control of network of coupled spin half particles ( acting as qubits in liquid and solid state NMR quantum conputing with fixed interaction Hamiltonian and ability to selectively excite some of the qubits .
One of the goals of this project is to develop geometric methods for computing fundamental bounds on the minimum time it takes to produce unitary evolution in a network of coupled quantum systems and find time optimal control laws which achieve these bounds .
These methods are based on variational ideas as captured by the theory of optimal control .
Finding optimal strategies to control the dynamics of quantum networks can be reduced to problems in Riemannian geometry of computing subriemannian geodesics in certain homogeneous spaces .
Using these geometric techniques time optimal control strategies for quantum networks are being computed .
This research project addresses the gap in the understanding of the polyhedral ( geometric ) structure of general mixed-integer programming problems .
With an ultimate goal of developing efficient and effective cutting plane procedures for mixed-integer problems with general integer variables , strong cutting planes applicable to general mixed-integer problems will be identified through polyhedral analysis of fundamental single-constraint mixed-integer sets .
The methods of the research are based on a recent work on sequence independent lifting of valid inequalities through the use of superadditive functions for general mixed-integer programming .
The expected outcome of this research project is novel cutting plane procedures that will be incorporated in branch-and-cut algorithms for solving large-scale mixed-integer programming problems .
If successful , the research project may lead to significant advances in the understanding of general mixed-integer polyhedra and in the solution methods for large-scale instances of mixed-integer problems with general integer variables .
Distribution systems are most commonly radial type and composed of overhead and underground lines .
During the past decade , there has been increasingly more interest in utilizing distributed generators ( DGs ) in distribution systems to offer the best long-term solution to reliability , price and pollution issues for power utilities .
Distributed generators provide a source of active electric power , and are directly connected to the distribution network or to the network on the customer side of the meter.Protection for distribution systems aims to minimize the duration of a fault and the number of customers affected by the fault .
This entails the selection and coordination of appropriate protective devices .
Presently , protection schemes for radial type distribution feeders are developed assuming there are no generation sources on the distribution system .
Hence the protection schemes must be adapted for the new and different characteristics that the integration of DGs will bring to distribution feeder circuits.The PIs propose to perform studies of load and fault currents by developing new load flow and short circuit analysis methods for radial distribution feeders with DGs .
Also the PIs propose to adapt the coordination and overcurrent relays methodology ( directional and non-directional ) for radial distribution feeder circuits when DGs are energized or not energized .
The distributed generators that will be studied include AC generators ( induction and synchronous ) and inverter-connected generators ( photovoltaic modules , fuel cells , etc .
) The PIs will include one graduate student and three undergraduate researchers on the research project .
Also the results will be integrated into two graduate courses .
This is an award made in response to a ( small ) proposal submitted to the Information Technology Research ( ITR ) initiative .
The award is co-funded by the Divisions of Materials Research and Chemistry .
The highly computational research concerns quantum mechanical and statistical mechanical problems in which a multiplicity of length or time scales renders approximate solutions inaccurate and exact numerical methods intractable .
The research focuses on problems that can be reduced to the solution of eigenvalue problems for which one can use and develop quantum Monte Carlo methods without uncontrolled approximations.In critical phenomena , a multiplicity of scales arises from the divergence of the correlation length and the relaxation time .
For weakly-bound clusters , the quantum mechanical component of this research , strong anharmonicity with the attendant floppiness yields a multiplicity of length scales .
Here solution of the Schroedinger equation poses the computational challenge .
This research will develop novel computational methods to obtain quantum mechanical spectra of weak-bound clusters .
In particular , it addresses a problem that was identified in 1997 as an important , unsolved problem in cluster physics , viz .
the computation of energies of bound states of small 4He clusters .
These clusters find themselves in the vicinity of continuous dissociation transitions , where ground or excited state is about to merge with the continuous part of the spectrum , and the various length scales in turn go to infinity continuously .
In the statistical mechanical portion of the research , the goal is to perform high accuracy computations of dynamical critical exponents , which in particular will be used in high precision tests of extended scaling relations proposed for the two-dimensional XY model .
The work is of theoretical interest for the field of dynamical critical phenomena , and has implications for the study of superconducting films , Josephson junction arrays , and 4He films. % % % This is an award made in response to a ( small ) proposal submitted to the Information Technology Research ( ITR ) initiative .
The award is co-funded by the Divisions of Materials Research and Chemistry .
The highly computational research concerns quantum mechanical and statistical mechanical problems in which a multiplicity of length or time scales renders approximate solutions inaccurate and exact numerical methods intractable .
The research focuses on problems that can be reduced to the solution of eigenvalue problems for which one can use and develop quantum Monte Carlo methods without uncontrolled approximations.The research deals with two complementary projects .
In critical phenomena , a multiplicity of scales arises from the divergence of the correlation length and the relaxation time .
Here high precision calculations will be done to test scaling relations .
For weakly-bound clusters , the quantum mechanical component of this research and of great interest in chemistry , strong anharmonicity with the attendant floppiness yields a multiplicity of length scales .
This component of the research will be done in collaboration with the theoretical chemistry group at Berkeley .
*** Proposal Number CTS-0218801Principal Investigator C. PozrikidisInstitution U California , San DiegoTitle Investigation of hydrodynamics of suspensions of particles , droplets , and capsulesABSTRACTThe objective of the proposed project is to significantly improve the effectiveness of the boundary integral method by hybridizing it with a finite-difference technique .
The purpose is to be able to carry out numerical simulations with many particles suspended in a fluid with the objective to study flow characteristics of drops , capsules , and particles .
The novel aspect of the approach is to project the point force distribution on the boundary on an underlying collocation points and solve for the flow field on this grid .
The method will be applied to suspensions , emulsions with and without surfactants , capsules , and foams .
The method is shown to be scalable on large parallel processors .
Caroly A. Shumway1 , Hans A. Hofmann21New England Aquarium ; 2Harvard UniversityCollaborative Research How Do Social and Habitat Complexities Shape Brain Structure ? The human brain is larger than that of any other primate species .
As humans evolved , what environmental or social forces caused our own brain expansion ?
If an animal lives in an extended family group , does the need to identify individual members within the group lead to a better ability to recognize faces , compared with species that are more solitary ?
Since most vertebrate groups offer only a limited number of species for comparison , these questions will be studied in the species-rich African cichlid fishes that live in diverse habitats and show an astonishing range of social behaviors .
The principal investigators have found that complex behaviors occur more often in complex rock environments than in simpler sand habitats .
Because of the large numbers of closely related but behaviorally diverse species in each lake ( which makes cichlids the gold standard for comparative studies exploring how brain and behavior evolved ) , one factor ( e.g. , social behavior ) can be kept constant in a comparative study while varying the other ( e.g. , habitat ) .
In this way it has been possible to show that both factors - environment and social - are important evolutionary forces .
In the present study brain structures and cognitive abilities ( such as individual recognition and spatial memory ) of species differing in social behavior or habitat will be compared .
Ultimately , this work will shed light on how environmental and social factors like monogamy and familial groups shape brain structure and function .
The complex behaviors being studied , such as spatial memory and recognition , are of direct relevance to humans .
DIGITAL REPRESENTATION OF STRUCTURAL RESPONSE FOR THE RELIABILITY ASSESSMENT OF COMPLEX SYSTEMSABSTRACTCurrent research efforts in structural engineering are geared toward the development of performance based design and safety evaluation criteria that take into consideration the various uncertainties in estimating system behavior and future loading conditions .
System reliability methods provide the means to address these important points .
However , most existing analytical reliability techniques have one or more limitations in their ablity to a ) accurately model structural behavior at high loads , b ) consider different performance criteria , c ) identify multiple equally important failure modes , and d ) account for load combinations .
The application of simulation techniques in conjunction with general purpose finite element packages provides methods with a strong potential for resolving many of these outstanding issues .
The purpose of this research is then to develop a simulation-based method for the reliability assessment of structural systems , which would realistically model their behavior at high loads , be implementable in practical situations , and provide accurate solutions for complex structures using efficient algorithms .
The first tool required to perform a simulation-based reliability analysis of a structural system consists of an accurate and efficient nonlinear analysis program capable of modeling the behavior of the structure for a specific ( deterministic ) set of conditions .
The second tool is a systematic search algorithm that can identify probabilistically dominant failure modes accounting for the randomness of loads and material properties .
Closed-form solutions for the response of complex nonlinear structures are difficult to obtain and only a digital representation of their behavior is possible through the application of the finite element method .
Point estimates of the response under different load intensities and material properties are usually obtained from variations on the Newton-Raphson algorithm .
These point estimates may often misidentify the ultimate capacity and may not accurately model the softening part of the loading curve due to the accumulation of numerical errors and because of the properties of the stiffness matrix in these ranges .
In this study , the Singular Value Decomposition , SVD , method in combination with the Lanczos algorithm will be used to accurately trace the response of a structure at high loads .
The efficiency , robustness , and stability of the proposed method will be demonstrated .
Due to the random nature of the problem , the safety assessment of a structure can only be established using reliability techniques .
Since the behavior of a structure with several failure modes is best represented in digital form , modern heuristic techniques may provide the most appropriate tools to assess its reliability .
In particular , Genetic Algorithms , GA , have been shown to provide robust techniques for the reliability analysis of structures with multiple failure modes but may be inefficient due to the shotgun search strategy that they are based upon .
To improve the efficiency of GA , a filtration operator will be introduced based on the principle of genetic elitism .
The modified GA will provide an efficient method to estimate the reliability of complex structures , as well as identify its dominant failure modes and controlling random variables .
This project will introduce advanced tools of computational mathematics into the field of structural mechanics .
The study will stress the application of the proposed methods for the simulation based design of civil engineering structures although they will be applicable to fields as varied as electronic circuit design and Micro-Electro-Mechanical-Systems .
Training of students in the subjects of matrix computational methods , artificial intelligence , and statistical computing will be a primary goal .
Such training will provide future generations of structural engineers with the well-rounded education needed to make decisions and provide solutions to real life complex problems under uncertainty .
This grant is made in response to a small proposal submitted to the Information Technology Research ( ITR ) Initiative .
The PI will leverage information technology and sophisticated methods from the statistical mechanics of disordered systems to systematically explore large , complex biological models .
These models are sloppy , and the key challenge is to extract reliable and falsifiable predictions from them .
The PI will apply statistical mechanics not to the physical system , but to the parameters in the dynamical models of the system this meta-modeling technique thus draws predictions from the entire ensemble of models that are consistent with the currently available data .
Meta-modeling will be applied to four problems .
Three of these are systems studied in the field of cellular signal transduction the Erk system in PC12 cells ; growth factor receptor trafficking and Cdc42 ; and the cell cycle in the colon cell line Caco-2 .
The final application is in ecology the nutrient cycles in forested ecosystems .
The PI bypasses traditional analytical methods in mathematical statistics , by leveraging the computational power made possible by the information technology revolution .
The sampling methods are direct , flexible , and easily implemented ; the methods properly average over multiple locally optimal states and properly cope with nonlinearity in the modeling process .
The PI will use many technical ideas drawn from materials simulations .
Numerical efficiency is enhanced through the use of a soft-mode symmetry-breaking field to penalize computer time , and through the use of algorithms developed to accelerate simulations of glassy materials .
Weakly-coupled replicas of the model will be used to avoid problems due to soft modes when comparing different cell types renormalization of parameters will be studied when comparing different theories of the same system .
These methods are efficiently run in parallel on current large-scale computers ; ensembel genration could be Grid enabled , delocalized over the Web.The meta-modeling concept of abstracting the modeling process into a statistical mechanics problem transforms a tedious , ill-posed search into an exciting new problem in complex , disordered systems .
From an applications view , insights drawn from the materials physics community form powerful tools , allowing real predictive power where only qualitative exploration was previously possible .
From a physics view , the prevalence of soft modes in parameter space provides new insights and provokes new methods .
From an information technology view , intensive computational analysis can now be brought to bear on a large new class of problems of importance to science and society.The three signal transduction networks being studied are of particular interest to the development of drug therapies in cancer , and are a well-studied preview of the kinds of challenges the bioinformatics and proteomics revolution will present in the coming decade .
The extension to ecological meta-modeling will lead to applications in many other complex systems where incomplete or preliminary data nonetheless need rigorous analysis. % % % This grant is made in response to a small proposal submitted to the Information Technology Research ( ITR ) Initiative .
The PI will leverage information technology and sophisticated methods from the statistical mechanics of disordered systems to systematically explore large , complex biological models .
These models are sloppy , and the key challenge is to extract reliable and falsifiable predictions from them .
The PI will apply statistical mechanics not to the physical system , but to the parameters in the dynamical models of the system this meta-modeling technique thus draws predictions from the entire ensemble of models that are consistent with the currently available data .
Meta-modeling will be applied to four problems .
Three of these are systems studied in the field of cellular signal transduction the Erk system in PC12 cells ; growth factor receptor trafficking and Cdc42 ; and the cell cycle in the colon cell line Caco-2 .
The final application is in ecology the nutrient cycles in forested ecosystems .
*** The Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission ( IOC ) of UNESCO coordinates and facilitatesocean research among governments .
A total of 129 countries comprise the membership ; theUnited States is a key participant and strong supporter of IOC activities .
The IOC develops and promotes international research to improve global undestanding of ocean processes and their relationship to the sustainable development and stewardship of ocean resoruces .
This project consitutes the NSFportion of support to the Ocean Science Section of the IOC , including development of a new program on Multidisciplinary Science and Natural Resources and an international initiative to examine critical issues of land-atmosphere-ocean biogeochemistry .
This project involves a conference on social science disciplines and American Indian peoples .
The conference ( a ) integrates existing knowledge of Native psychology and develops a research agenda for advancing such knowledge , ( b ) exchanges information on strategies and tools for teaching Native social science and developing a model for such courses and curricula , ( c ) examines ways to better integrate social research , teaching and practice with the needs and goals of Native communities , and ( d ) plans strategies for enhancing links between social science and Native communities .
Native communities and individuals face a variety of unique problems and opportunities .
Effective scientific assistance is needed to help address those problems and opportunities .
Skills and expertise from social science could play a critical role in assisting with such important issues as Native economic advancement , educational attainment , community and individual health , and management of tribal resources and services .
The potential value of psychological science to these outcomes especially exists because many past efforts to execute applied projects in Native communities have floundered as much or more due to human factors ( such as factional infighting , poor planning , poor leadership , or inadequate skills ) as because of financial or technological inadequacies to the projects .
Social science has only scratched the surface in investigating the unique dynamics of Native cultures , Native social patterns , and Native psyches .
This project will 1 ) summarize the state of social science knowledge of Native individuals and communities .
2 ) Develop a social science research agenda .
3 ) Promote exchanges and development of collaborations among social science researchers who focus on Native issues .
4 ) Plan a curriculum to teach Native Psychology and create an educational pipeline and an educational structure to develop Native Psychology scientists .
The objective of the proposed work is to develop an integrated suite of tools and approaches for the modeling of uncertain systems for feedback control design purposes .
Our modeling framework is based upon robust control theory , which is supported by several sophisticated control design methods .
These models are in effect set descriptions , where the sets are generated by unknown but bounded dynamic perturbations within the model .
These models allow the designer to capture the variety of uncertain behaviors that a physical system will generate .
Although this is a powerful and flexible modeling framework , the tools available for modeling physical systems are limited .
We address thisarea in this proposal , with the ultimate goal being the development of a suite of modeling techniques and software tools for control system modeling.Our prior work on model validation for robust control models forms the basis for the work proposed here .
This approach has led to tools which allow the designer to experimentally quantify the difference between a physical system and the closest member of a robust control model set .
In the area of theoretical model development we propose extending our current model validation approaches to describe non-linear and parametrically varying systems .
In the experimental application area , two systems will be studied control of semiconductor growth rate and composition in a metalorganic vapor deposition ( MOCVD ) reactor ; control of unstable rotating magnetic bearing systems .
Both applications have a great deal of industrial relevance , as well as providing challenging testbeds for the theoretical work .
In the algorithmic development work , we propose refining structured algorithms to handle the very large problems that arise when applying model validation methods to data drivenproblems.The strong experimental component has significant wider benefits .
The MOCVD experimental system is a nontraditional area for control work and fosters interaction and the exchange of ideas between the control theory community and semiconductor and materials scientists .
The experiments are also integrated into engineering course work at UCSB , and are currently used as demonstration examples in undergraduate control courses and graduate level design laboratories .
EIA-0218142George E. Karniadakis Brown UniversityITR/DDDAS Generalized Polynomial Chaos Parallel Algorithms for Modeling and Propagating Uncertainty in Physical and Biological SystemsThe applications we target are prototype problems in bioengineering and in nanotechnology .
The coupled nature of such problems and the many parameters involved provide a good testbed for evaluating the performance of the new algorithms at resolutions from 0.1 to 1 billion degrees-of-freedom .
The sources of uncertainty may be caused by incomplete knowledge or fluctuations in boundary or initial conditions , geometric domain , transport coefficients , mechanical properties , and other external forcing or volumetric sources.The proposed work will have significant and broad impact as it will establish a composite error bar in large-scale simulations and will enable numerical stochastic approaches to large-scale simulations of physical and biological systems .
It will also benefit many other fields including climate and network/web traffic modeling , where current uncertainty modeling approaches are inadequate .
Stochastically simulated responses can serve as sensitivity analysis that could potentially guide experimental work and dynamic instrumentation .
PI 's Name , Institution Kon-Well Wang , Penn State UniversityProposal Number 0218597Proposal Title ITR - An Agent-Based Negotiation Framework for the Robust Design of Active-Passive Hybrid Piezoelectric Vibration Control NetworksProject Abstract The objective of the proposed research is to investigate novel information technology ( IT ) -based approach for synthesizing electromechanically optimized smart structures .
Specifically , we will develop an Agent-based Negotiation framework for the robust design of large-scale active-passive hybrid piezoelectric networks ( APPN ) for structural vibration control .
The framework is to assist the designer in making high-level design decisions ( e.g. , the selection of circuit topology ) and in analyzing the tradeoff among conflicting design objectives , which include the robustness requirement for dealing with model uncertainty .
The research tasks include methodology development , system analysis , and experimental investigation .
The goal of the education plan is to integrate the research with various educational programs at Penn State and achieve a broad range of impact on student learning .
The significance and impacts are ( a ) This study will be a pioneer effort exploring the feasibility of utilizing IT to optimally tailor a large-scale electro-mechanically coupled smart structure system , considering design uncertainties , tradeoffs , and circuit topology selections .
( b ) The investigation will have significant impacts on agent-based technology because it addresses the increasingly important issue of negotiation among a structured team of collaborative agents .
It can increase the scalability of agent teams and enable them to adapt themselves to avoid cognitive overload in complex domains such as distributed decision makings .
( c ) The research will have broad influence on many engineering systems .
The automotive , aerospace , manufacturing , instrumentation and many other industries will benefit from the vibration control technologies developed based on the outcome of this investigation .
( d ) The educational efforts will have broad impact on teaching the next generation of engineers and IT workforce to utilize modern computer technology for solving large-scale complex engineering problems with uncertainties and conflicting design requirements .
ABSTRACTThe Natural Hazards Research and Applications Information Center at the University of Colorado in Boulder has served as a national and international clearinghouse for research data on natural disasters , related technological events , and programs to reduce damages from them since 1976 .
This proposal requests renewal of support for the Center for the two-year period from October 2002 through September 2004 .
While the Center 's basic activities will not changer significantly , they will be adjusted to reflect the new challenges facing the hazard community in the 21st century .
The Center will continue to monitor and disseminate hazards research information to multiple users .
Furthermore , it will publish and distribute the Natural Hazards Observer to over 15,000 subscribers six times a year , operate the electronic Disaster Research newsletter , and disseminate information via the World Wide Web and traditional hard copy publications .
The Center will continue to co-sponsor the Natural Hazards Review journal with the American society of civil Engineers and produce the Natural Hazards Information publication series .
It will continue to build its library database as well as upgrade the system it uses to put the database on the Web .
In July of 2003 and 2004 , the Center will sponsor an annual national and international workshop involving hazards researchers and practitioners .
Also , the Center will provide travel grants to social scientists to conduct quick response studies of specific hazard events in the immediate post-disaster period , while simultaneously facilitate a conversation to explore the need for the United States to establish a more systematic approach to quick response research following major urban disasters .
The Center 's in-house research program will focus in two directions .
First , it will develop a program to sponsor competitive dissertation grants for new scholars of hazards and risk .
Second , research will continue to questions identified in Disasters by Design A Reassessment of Natural Hazards in the United States ( Mileti and others , 1999 ) .
Discrete event systems ( DESs ) are systems evolving according to the occurrence of certain discrete qualitative changes , called events .
Examples of events include the arrival of a customer in a queue , the termination of an algorithm in a computer program , the loss of a message packet in a communication network , the breakdown of a machine in a manufacturing system.In this proposal we consider stochastic DESs modeled by Markov processes , and study control problems that satisfy qualitative properties .
We outline a program of work aiming to develop a unified framework for qualitative control of stochastic DESs .
In particular , we propose to study the control of stochastic systems with general qualitative constraints such as safety , non-blocking , recurrence , and stability ; optimal control subject to qualitative constraints ; control under complete or partial observations ; effects of using deterministic versus randomized policies ; and effects of using stationary versus non-stationary and asymptotically stationary control policies.Safety constraints are specified as unit-interval-valued vectors serving as an upper bound for the state probability distribution of the controlled Markov chain .
Non-blocking specifications require that the probability of hitting a target set of states stays above a certain minimum value .
Recurrence or liveness amounts to the probability of hitting a target set of states infinitely-often being bounded below by a positive constant , while convergence or stability demands that the state probability distribution enters and stays in a `safe ' set within a finite number of steps .
EIA-0218359Hao Yan Duke UniversityMolecular Robotics for DNA NanostructuresThe objective of this project is to develop molecular motors that are incorporated into self-assembled DNA lattices .
The main goal of this project will be to develop experimental proof-of concept demonstrations of the construction of novel DNA motors such as a DNA motor that is designed to have both translational and rotational motion .
Incorporation of molecular motors into DNA arrays has many applications It can selectively manipulate molecules using molecular motor devices arranged on DNA tiling arrays ; A DNA array of motors may offer a mechanism to do DNA computation of arrays whose elements ( the tiles ) hold state ; Parallel cellular automata computation may be executed from arrays of finite state automata each of which hold state .
This project is also developing DNA nanostructures containing motors that operate autonomously without environmental changes .
Methods are being tested to use fuel DNA to provide energy to drive the motion of DNA nanostructures .
As an alternative approach , experiments are conducted to incorporate protein motors such as Kinesin into DNA lattices .
In particular , the use of selective aptamer binding to link protein motors to periodic sites of a DNA lattice will be tested .
The resulting arrays of protein motors have many applications to nanorobotics , e.g. , they are potentially very useful for sorting and transport of nanoparticles .
Structural reliability/redundancy has become a serious concern in the building industry after the poor performance of some buildings in recent earthquakes .
This research project carries out a systematic investigation of structural redundancy and application to design practice .
Within the framework of structural dynamic and reliability analyses , the effects of major redundancy-contributing factors are systematically examined , with emphasis on structural configuration , member ductility capacity , over-strength , interaction of structural components , and torsional motions .
Recent SAC Steel Project analytical and experimental results of structural member and system behavior are used .
A risk-consistent redundancy factor is then developed for calculating the design forces such that structures of different configurations and designs can meet reliability-based performance requirements .
The impact of the proposed research will be a timely contribution to fundamental understanding of structural redundancy and the development of a rational basis for a performance-based redundancy design factor in codes and standards .
EIA-0218341Mark Saffman University of Wisconsin-MadisonSingle-Photon and single atom sources for quantum informaiton processingThis research project is demonstrating new ways of engineering single photon and single atom sources for a range of applications in quantum information science .
The experimental approach starts with several thousand Rb atoms that are trapped at ultrahigh densities in a far-off-resonance optical beam .
A many atom entangled state is then created using the dipole blockade mechanism that arises from atom-atom interactions in a dense atomic vapor as proposed recently by Lukin , et al .
( 2001 ) .The trapped ensemble of entangled atoms is manipulated optically to create novel sources at the level of single atoms and single photons .
Using additional near-resonant laser beams atoms are selectively ejected from the trap depending on their internal state .
This enables deterministic loading of a single atom in an optical trap , as well as single- or multiple-atom-on-demand sources with optically controllable trajectories .
By using entanglement between atoms in ground and excited internal states a single-photon source is being created that has a diffraction limited , steerable emission pattern .
This approach is enabling a number of novel solutions to manipulation of matter and fields at the level of single quantum objects with applications to quantum communication , cryptography , and computing .
A key component of this work is the enhancement of its impact through outreach and educational activities .
Presentations at local schools and lectures for the general public on quantum information and computation are allowing the University of Wisconsin to communicate to the local community , including the burgeoning photonics industry in the Madison area , the importance and intellectual excitement of this research program .
EIA-0218652John KettersonNorthwestern UniversityA Qubit Based on SINIS Josephson Tunnel JunctionForming controlled super positions of quantum states lies at the heart of quantum computing and devices that perform this function have been termed qubits .
The device chosen here to realize a qubit is based on a double-barrier SINIS Josephson junction ( where S is a superconductor , I is an insulator , and N is a normal metal ) .
The basic strategy involves the controlled manipulation of the occupations in a 2-level system comprised of the two lowest ( the ground and the first excited ) Andreev bound states ( ABS ) that can form within an SINIS junction .
In fact the parameters of the SINIS-based qubit can chosen such that only the above two ABS levels are present ; this conclusion , which independently follows from the theory , is in agreement with preliminary experimental data taken on Nb/AlOxAl/AlOx/Nb double-barrier junctions .
The required control of the two Andreev states is achieved by applying appropriate bias voltages and transport currents to a device fabricated in a three-terminal geometry .
The control parameters turn out to be the voltage across one of the barriers , and the transport current across one of the super conducting layers ; these quantities play the role of the dynamic magnetic fields , which enter the associated qubit Hamiltonian .
The primary goal of this proposal is to achieve the controlled manipulation of the Andreev bound states and , in parallel , advance the understanding of the underlying physical mechanisms .
This will include i ) extending the present technology for preparing two-terminal SINIS devices to 3-terminal devices ; ii ) performing measurements on the ABS characteristics , including the observation of Rabi oscillations between the two ABS levels , iii ) further developing the theory of localized ABS inside double barrier junctions to allow for arbitrary barrier transparency and arbitrary impurity concentrations in all three electrodes , iv ) performing detailed numerical simulations of the switching dynamics ; v ) studying the recombination and decoherence effects that relate to the performance of these devices , and lastly vi ) examining strategies for connecting qubits to form simple logic circuits .
0236775HagadornIn many of the world most exceptional fossil deposits , extraction of fossils from the matrix is difficult , and fossils are often so small that serial sectioning is uniformative .
Nowhere is this more true than in the Neoproterozoic , where much of the fossil record is soft-bodied , microscopic , preserved in 3D , and/or entombed in a manner inimical to mechanical or chemical extraction techniques .
Microfocus X-ray computed tomography ( microCT ) enables nondestructive visualization of the three-dimensional internal structure of geological and biological samples , and offers a new manner in which to examine such fossils .
This grant will support purchase of a 100 kV Skyscan 1072 microCT instrument , allowing visualization and creation of models of structures as small as 500nm .
This instrument will contribute substantially to undergraduate and faculty research at Amherst College , as well as at other five-College Consortium institutions .
*** Nanoscale Investigation of Cement Hydration by Nuclear Resonant Reaction Analysis Nuclear Resonant Reaction Analysis ( NRRA ) has been applied for the first time to study cement hydration .
Through the use of this technique , the change in hydrogen concentration on a few nanometer scale ( corresponding to a few unit cells ) can be studied as a function of time during the induction period .
Preliminary results have demonstrated that the surface layer formed during the induction period on the tricalcium silicate grains ( used in this initial study ) is consistent with a tobermorite-like material , based on the absolute value of the observed hydrogen concentration and the measured thickness of the surface layer .
Optimum beam energy resolution is a critical parameter as the spatial resolution of the measurement is defined largely by the energy resolution of the incident ion beam .
Therefore , the Dynamitron Tandem accelerator at the Ruhr Universitat , Bochum , Germany is being used for the experimental studies as this machine has had extensive work done over the last fifteen years to generate the best possible energy resolution for ion beams .
The hydrogen concentration is obtained over a depth of a few nanometers at the surface of the grains and can be measured continuously to a depth of about 2 microns into the grains .
An initial study of the hydration process of tricalcium silicate at 20 oC determined an induction time of 4.25 hours with a statistical precision of 0.07 hours .
This proposal will support a detailed investigation of cement hydration by applying the NRRA technique .
A series of experiments will investigate the effect of different parameters on the hydration process .
The analysis of the experimental data will provide clear insights into the way different parameters , such as temperature , pH , and starting composition , affect the hydration process .
This information will ultimately be used to improve the formulation of cements for construction and other purposes .
P.I .
- OrcuttProposal - 0236557Development of the MERMAID float an autonomous vehicle for recording regional earthquakes within the world oceansPROJECT SUMMARYThe PIs propose to test whether untethered floats can record arrivals of teleseismic P waves while drifting at depths of 1-2 km .
Specifically , they propose to construct a prototype float for recording earthquakes within the oceans .
They have named this float MERMAID ( Mobile Earthquake Recorder in Marine Areas by Independent Divers ) .
If the proposed pilot project is successful , it will opens up the possibility of using existing monitoring efforts to fill in the large gaps in global teleseismic coverage posed within the ocean basins , and will significantly enhance our ability to image the deeper regions of the Earth through tomographic inversions This interagency transfer to the NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies supports publication of a workshop report , associated with the workshop held on Air Pollution and Climate Forcing held April 29-May 3 , 2002 in Honolulu , Hawaii .
The purpose of the workshop was to illuminate the role of air pollution as a global climate forcing and to place climate-related impacts of air pollution in the context of its other human health and environmental impacts .
The workshop itself was an interagency effort , held at the East-West Center of the University of Hawaii , and sponsored by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration , the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration , the National Science Foundation , the Hewlett Foundation , the California Air Resources Board , the California Energy Commission , the International Pacific Research Center , and the East-West Center .
Specifically , this transfer covers the production of 500 copies of the report , Air Pollution as a Climate Forcing A Workshop .
ABSTRACTProposal Number CTS-0236281Principal Investigator Tour , James M. and McHale , MaryAffiliation Rice UTitle SGER NanoKids Education Outreach Project-Proof of ConceptTen different configurations of molecules resembling human stick figures have been synthesized in the PI 's laboratory .
The molecules as a group are dubbed the NanoKids .
By portraying these molecules in a series of computer-animated lessons , the PI intends to develop a proof-of-concept support curriculum for introducing students in the 6-12 grade to the molecular environment .
The longer vision is to develop extensive lessons based on the National Science and Technology Education standards .
This SGER proposal is to obtain the funds for the proof-of-concept and to prepare for the upcoming submission of the full proposal .
This project investigates the formation and fate of organic nitrogen compounds in a moderately polluted forest environment .
Such compounds may play a crucial role in nitrogen cycling and sequestration of atmospheric carbon dioxide - interactions between the terrestrial biosphere and the ambient atmosphere are understood poorly and present an area of study not widely considered at this time by those concerned with carbon sequestration in forest ecosystems .
Specifically , the project will develop the capacity for measuring fluxes of some selected alkyl nitrates - ( isomeric ) isoprene nitrate ( s ) and peroxyacyl nitrates including peroxyacetyl nitrate ( PAN ) , producing standard ( s ) for absolute calibration of isoprene nitrate , and characterizing the fate of organic nitrates through deposition within a forest environment .
This project will be conducted at the Program for Research on Oxidants Photochemistry , Emissions , and Transport ( PROPHET ) field site at the University of Michigan Biological Station .
Kinetics of organic nitrate reactions with the hydoxyl radical ( OH ) will also be investigated in the laboratory .
With regard to broader impacts , the project will characterize some potentially important forest-atmosphere interactions , offer insight into the role of nitrogen cycling in the carbon cycle within terrestrial forest ecosystems , and improve present understanding of forest biogeochemistry .
The project will provide scholarship and capacity building through technology transfer to a number of young scientists , many of those women , and through institutional and PROPHET program outreach - through the larger NSF Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship ( IGERT ) and Biosphere Atmosphere Research and Training ( BART ) programs - facilitate broader community education and involvement .
Research over the past century has shown that where earthworms are abundant , they significantly influence soil processes critical to the functioning of terrestrial ecosystems .
Recent interest has focused on impacts of invasive , exotic earthworms on soil processes , particularly in temperate regions .
Dramatic effects of introduced earthworms on soil organic matter dynamics have been reported in a number of cases .
The focus of nearly all of this work has been on a few species of exotic earthworms which have achieved wide distributions and now dominate the soil fauna in many ecosystems .
Such effects have rarely been reported from invasions of ecosystems inhabited by native earthworm assemblages , particularly where soils are undisturbed .
Objectives of this proposed work are to address the following questions1 ) Do native earthworm species maintain exclusivity or dominance over exotic earthworm species in undisturbed , native ecosystems ?
2 ) Are the impacts of exotic earthworm species on soil processes reduced in the presence of native earthworm species in their native ecosystems ?
Broader impacts This work will promote training of a post-doctoral associate , a graduate student and several undergraduate students .
Collaborations with regional and national museums will be developed to foster any new biological collections and to promote biodiversity information .
One of the ultimate goals of tornado research is to predict tornado occurrence and strength as a function of the environments which give rise to them , a goal made extremely difficult by the range of physical scales and phenomena involved and the complexity of the interactions between them .
The objective of this research project is an improved understanding of one critical ingredient of this problem the phenomenon of near-surface intensification .
Prior work by the Principal Investigators ( PIs ) and others has demonstrated that the turbulent interaction of a vortex with the surface can produce maximum wind speeds more than double those well above the surface and an order of magnitude greater intensification for short periods .
Changes in the near-surface inflow can make the difference between extreme near-surface intensification or none at all .
The PIs have identified a corner flow swirl ratio and a dimensionless time rate of change of low-swirl flux as two critical parameters governing this behavior .
Near-surface intensification is expected to be important on both the mesocylone scale and the tornado scale , but much remains to be done to clarify its role in both tornadogenesis and determining tornado intensity , and to determine how to approximate this phenomenon in subgrid/surface parameterizations for storm scale simulations .
This research will use and extend the PI 's existing high-resolution , three ? dimensional , unsteady , numerical model of tornado vortices .
Controlled , limited-domain , numerical experiments will focus on identifying the dynamical relationships involved in near-surface intensification during transient vortex evolution .
The approach complements observational case studies and storm model simulations and should prove useful in interpreting the results of both .
The code will be modified to include buoyancy generated by latent heat released in the core and debris loading to allow initial estimates of their effects on the near-surface flow .
Adding the funnel and debris clouds to the simulations will also foster more direct comparisons with field observations of tornadoes , such as videos and fine-scale Doppler radar measurements .
Society will benefit through increased public safety , if improvements can be made in forecasting which radar detected mesocyclones will generate a tornado and what the damage potential might be .
This research , which will include providing results to the research community through publications , meetings , graduate student education , and personal interaction , is designed to provide a necessary ingredient for such improvements .
Also , detailed information on the tornado wind structure and debris transport should aid engineer 's attempts to design structures to withstand tornado conditions .
This research is intended to produce tools to assess potential regional effects of global anthropogenic climate change on the structure of North American daily hydrology in different seasons .
The PIs will apply climate prediction methodology to forecast the probabilities of hydrological weather extremes .
A new comprehensive statistical framework will be developed for the description of daily precipitation and streamflow data .
Using this framework , the PIs will examine variability and predictability of daily hydrological extremes .
They will apply statistical methods designed for data with heavy-tailed distributions ( distributions with relatively large numbers of extreme events that ca n't be accounted for by exponentially decaying tails of traditional Probability Density Functions ( PDFs ) .
They will then examine the influence of climate forcing in space and time on the shape of seasonal distributions of daily hydrology .
The parameters describing the PDF 's shape will become predictands from which statistical information , e.g. , frequencies of extreme events , can be derived.This research has broader impacts including graduate student education and research results applied to the important societal issue of extreme hydrologic events in the context of a changing climate .
Myxococcus xanthus , the most intensively studied myxobacterial species , is the preeminent bacterial model of multicellular development , cell differentiation , and gliding motility , and serves as a model for single-species biofilms .
Myxobacteria possess a rich secondary metabolism that includes synthesis of over 150 extracellular molecules with antimicrobial and anti-cancer activities .
Myxobacteria play an important role in maintaining the fertility of soil and constitute a taxonomically and physiologically unique group of organisms within the delta subdivision of the proteobacteria , none of which have been sequenced .
Over 30 academic research groups focus on many aspects of the biology of this unusual organism .
A low coverage sequence of M. xanthus has previously been accomplished by Cereon Genomics and is available to registered academic researchers and collaborators .
This resource , while useful for some purposes , is inadequate for comprehensive analysis of the function of the genome .
The lack of a completed genome minimizes the usefulness of comparisons of M. xanthus to other completed genomes .
The annotated sequence to be completed and made publicly available through this project will provide the critical resource for going forward in the functional analysis of the M. xanthus genome.The data from this project will have broad scientific impact , contributing to knowledge in such areas as genome evolution , genome enhancement for multicellular life , and bacterial chromosome size vs. stability .
Educational initiatives will bring Myxococcal genomics to high school teachers via an educational activity presented at a national teachers conference and a TIGR Genomics Course for Educators.This is a Microbial Genome Sequencing Award funded through a collaborative program between the National Science Foundation and the Department of Agriculture .
This grant will partially support for a 3-day workshop on using operations research to improve health care delivery .
Approximately 40-50 participants will meet in Ann Arbor , Michigan , September 25-27 , 2002 .
A number of recent conferences , including an NSF workshop in Atlanta and one sponsored by the National Academy of Engineering , both in 2001 , documented the opportunities for engineering to contribute to improving the quality and efficiency of health care delivery .
This workshop would bring together experts from the health care and operations research communities to identify critical research issues that can drive operational improvements in health care delivery systems .
The workshop would be jointly hosted by the University of Michigan which is a leader in both medical and health care research .
RenneEAR-0236925The goal of this Small Grant for Exploratory Research ( SGER ) project is to provide rock-magnetic and analytical transmission electron microscope data for crystallographically oriented magnetite inclusions in silicates ( COMIS ) in order to explore the conditions of origin of COMIS , and the fidelity with which they record magnetic fields under those conditions .
The research plan involves analyzing a number of COMIS in diverse samples in order to evaluate if the results obtained are robust enough to use them as paleomagnetic indicators .
If this SGER is successful , the techniques developed for COMIS will then be used for a variety of paleomagnetic applications , including measurement of geomagnetic paleointensity and tectonic applications of paleomagnetic data .
The results will also be useful for evaluating the possibility that stable magnetization of the oceanic crust , and of magnetic anomalies on other planets , is due to COMIS .
This project investigates the genetics and evolutionary potential of traits that are influenced by the environment provided by conspecifics .
These social environments ( e.g. , the competitive environment ) are particularly important because , since they originate from features of individuals , they can have a genetic basis .
Theoretical models have demonstrated that these genetically based environmental influences , or indirect genetic effects ( IGEs ) , can have important impacts on genetic architecture ( GA ) and evolution , but empirical studies of IGEs are lacking ( with the exception of studies of IGEs arising from the influence of parents on their offspring ) .
This project will provide valuable insights into the role of IGEs in GA , contributing to a better understanding of the genetic basis of complex phenotypes .
To analyze the contribution of IGEs to variation in trait expression the proposed research will use empirical methods developed by the PI .
This approach applies a theoretical model of trait expression to interpret components of trait variation in a population of interacting individuals .
Using this approach it is possible to separate direct and indirect effects of genes , which are often confounded or , in the case of IGEs , hidden to traditional methods .
The theoretical models can also be used to analyze the dynamics of phenotypic evolution based on observed GA , generating predictions that can be tested by artificial selection experiments or can be used to predict response to selection for improvement in agricultural systems .
These methods will be used to analyze the contribution of IGEs to the development of complex traits ( e.g. , seed number and total biomass ) in a rapid-cycling variety of Brassica rapa .
Data on the quantitative genetics of these traits will provide the foundation for a future proposal that will examine experimental evolution in the presence of IGEs and analyze molecular mapping of IGE loci to trait expression .
In this future project phenotypically divergent lines will be derived by artificial selection to test model predictions .
These divergent lines will be inbred and used to examine the genotype-to-phenotype map and evolutionary dynamics of IGE loci .
Thus , a major goal of this starter grant is to provide the critical data needed to develop a much larger and more comprehensive proposal in the future .
This will contribute significantly to the development of the career of the PI as a research scientist and will help establish the PIs new research lab .
The ultimate goal of this research program , to examine the molecular mapping of IGE loci , builds on the work from Dr. Wolf 's NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biological Informatics , where methods to analyze the genotype to phenotype mapping of maternal effect loci were developed .
Molecular analysis of GA is particularly complex when IGEs are present because the phenotype becomes the property of , and thus can map to , the genotypes of multiple individuals .
This novel aspect of GA has been poorly explored but previous work by the PI demonstrates that it can play an important role in mapping from genotype to phenotype for some types of traits .
To achieve this goal the previous advances made in theoretical and empirical methods will be combined with the development of new theoretical models to ultimately understand all of the pathways through which genotypes make phenotypes .
Soil improvement is a central issue to many of today 's projects where land is scarce , good quality materials are in short supply , and developed sites are often congested or contaminated .
Among the many in situ techniques available to improve soils , permeation grouting is historically the most commonly used in geotechnical engineering .
Traditionally , applications of permeation grouting involve ( a ) reducing or controlling seepage through geologic formations and structures and ( b ) strengthening soil .
More recently , the injection of cementitious grouts into soil is used to construct in situ barriers to contain contaminated leachate and to encapsulate hazardous waste .
Research will focus on cement grouts ( both Portland cement-based and slag cement-based varieties of primarily microfine cement and to a lesser extent ordinary cement ) because they are perhaps the most widely used due to their economic feasibility , permanence , and inert characteristics .
The problem is that often cement grout can not be successfully injected , although the grout exhibits appropriate rheological properties and sufficiently small particles by traditional filter criteria .
Consequently , the issue is why the grout was unable to be injected as predicted .
One of the primary thrusts of the research is to distinguish the effects of mechanical filtration , chemical filtration , rheology , and applied gradient on the injectability of cement grout .
These factors are interrelated ( some very strongly ) and governed by a number of variables .
An extensive series of parametric and phenomenological studies at both the microscopic and macroscopic level are undertaken to accomplish this objective .
Essential concepts from the fields of cement chemistry and transport processes will be synthesized to better understand and interrelate the early age microstructure of a cement grout to its injectability and deposition in the voids of a soil .
Emphasis is placed on the role of applied gradients on the flocculation behavior of the grout and the resulting morphology of the grout/soil matrix .
Cement grouts that exhibit significantly different chemical and rheological behavior will be injected into one-dimensional and three-dimensional sand-filled columns .
During the injection process , pressures will be monitored , grout samples will be collected from various sampling locations along the length of the column , and effluents will be collected .
Immediately subsequent to grouting , the cement content of the grouted soils will be assessed to quantify the mass of cement particles deposited in the soil matrix .
The improvement in the engineering properties of permeability and strength will be determined for hardened grouted soil samples .
The pore morphology of the grouted soil will be studied to correlate the microstructural behavior of a grout in response to pressure gradients applied during the injection process with the macrostructural behavior of soil improvement .
Microscopy of both wet grout and hardened grouted soils will be conducted .
The morphology of the grouted pores will strongly govern the resulting permeability of the soil and the extent or degree of improvement will be influenced by ( a ) the presence of preferential flow paths , ( b ) pore interconnectivity , ( c ) pore size and distribution , and ( d ) interfacial pores that may be attributed to the wettability of different pore fluids and ion concentrations relative to the grout .
Possible ways to improve injectability such as by mix additives , mixing sequence , preconditioning the soil , or injecting under deaired conditions will be explored .
The results from the variety of injection experiments will be used in the development of models to reasonably predict injectability and the extent of permeation grouting by knowledge of both the grout and soil properties .
0236527/ 0236654 Richardson/WoodingThis project consists of an analysis of the trajectories of RAFOS floats , deployed as part of the KAPEX experiment around the southern tip of Africa , in combination with ancillary data from surface drifters and satellite-borne altimeters .
Preliminary analysis of these trajectories show that many of them were trapped in Agulhas eddies .
A motivation for this work is the belief that Agulhas eddies both provide a significant conduit for flow from the Indian Ocean into the Atlantic and stir the ocean in the south-eastern Atlantic .
The proposed analysis seeks to summarize the life history and statistics ( including number , size , swirl velocity , translational velocity , and the interactions of eddies with each other and with bathymetry ) .
The investigator will compare the details of the trajectories with output from various numerical models of the region and collaborate with a German investigator in mapping the intermediate-depth velocity field in the S. Atlantic .
Penn State Erie 's REU Program in Mathematical Biology will involve undergraduates in one of the richest and fastest growing fields of mathematics .
It gives the six participants research training in mathematical biology and introduces them to several areas of current interest population dynamics , pattern formation in active media , the modeling of electrically excitable cells , and limb growth of plants and trees .
The only prerequisites are the successful completion of a course in ordinary differential equations and an interest in biology .
The goal of the program is two-fold .
First , the students receive an introduction to the theory and methods of nonlinear dynamical systems , including phase plane analysis and bifurcation theory .
These techniques are then used to answer questions about mathematical models of biological phenomena .
This is of great value since dynamical systems arise in many areas in addition to biology , such as physics , engineering , and chemistry .
Second , the students are exposed to current topics of research in mathematical biology .
Many of the topics discussed during the program are at the early stages of development , and offer many opportunities for future research .
Students will have access to Pentium computers running the Linux operating system and will learn the mathematical software package XPP , a powerful tool for phase plane and bifurcation analysis .
Seminars will be given throughout the program by both faculty and student participants along with discussion groups at the end of each day .
Since the seminal studies of Darwin and predecessors , multiple hypotheses have been proposed concerning evolutionary relationships among the barnacles of the world .
However , because of the strange and diverse morphologies associated with this most interesting group of crustaceans , discerning evolutionary relationships has been particularly difficult .
Furthermore , most modern attempts have been hampered by poor sampling of species diversity .
This international collaborative study will examine a broad array of barnacle species from around the world by sequencing DNA from multiple gene regions to infer evolutionary relationships among the major groups of barnacles .
The project will use state-of-the-art automated sequencing techniques combined with supercomputing applications for estimating genealogical relationships among the species sampled.The resulting genealogical relationships will then be used to explore biogeographic patterns of biodiversity among the barnacles .
These biogeographic patterns allow global inferences of patterns of diversity ( conspicuously absent for marine fauna in general ) thus informing global conservation decisions .
These results will be disseminated to the public through the Tree of Life web project ( tolweb.org - also supported by NSF ) .
This research represents a strong global collaboration , with co-Principal Investigators from the US , Denmark , and Australia and collaborators from many other countries including Brazil , Russia , and Spain , combining leading expertise in crustacean molecular systematics with barnacle morphology .
This project will also provide educational/training opportunities for undergraduates , high school teachers , graduate students , post-docs , and international faculty through research experiences and lab exchanges of personnel .
Pandharipande will study problems in the Gromov-Witten theory of algebraic varieties .
In the first two parts , recently developed methods in Gromov-Witten theory will be used to study the geometry of the moduli space of curves .
In particular , Hodge integrals and tautological rings will be studied .
The third part of the project is an investigation of the Toda equation for the potential of the projective line .
The fourth part is a study of degenerate and multiple cover calculations for threefolds and their relationship to M-theory.In this project , Pandharipande will study basic questions in the geometry of Riemann surfaces using new ideas from topological string theory .
The research undertaken will involve computations of basic integral series that play a central role in Gromov-Witten theory .
Also , the current perspective leads to many fundamental new lines of inquiry that will be pursued .
The whole subject lies on the boundary of several fields of mathematics and string theory .
This LTREB research will examine four key predictions .
First , plant resistance to herbivory affects community and ecosystem-level processes .
Beginning in 1982 genetically resistant and susceptible trees were identified , and on 1/2 of the susceptible trees , 2 species of common insect have been removed each year .
Studies involve tree fitness responses to chronic herbivory , mycorrhizal community responses , the community consequences of a cryptic keystone herbivore , and the use of resistant and susceptible trees in reconstructing past climates .
Ongoing studies of soil bacteria , nutrient cycling , and costs of resistance make these long-term experiments very important tocontinue .
Second , drought results in rapid ecotonal shifts , which alter community structure and ecosystem dynamics .
In 1996 a record drought occurred that resulted in 60 sites that suffered 30-70 % tree mortality and killed an estimated 75,000 mature trees .
These sites underwent a rapid ecotonal shift from pinyon-juniper woodland to juniper woodland or grassland .
Eleven of thesesites , paired with adjacent low mortality sites , represent a valuable resource because they are the direct result of a climate change event .
These sites are crucial for studying the causes and consequences of climate change on mycorrhizal mutualists , microbial decomposers , arthropod and vertebrate communities , and how environmental stress differentially affects biodiversity andecosystem function .
Third , repeated drought events have different effects than single drought events .
This year , 2002 , is already identified as the driest year in recorded history .
This new drought following the 1996 drought allows us to determine if the same sites suffer repeated mortality and selection , which is likely to have very different long-term consequences than a single mortality event .
Four , herbivore x environmental interactions affect insect outbreaks to alter community structure and ecosystem processes .
Since 1982 we have been monitoring the distribution of moth and scale insects that were restricted to sites of chronic stress .
However , in response to the record drought of 1996 , scales have expanded from these epicenters to become the largest outbreak in the southwest .
We have mapped their expansion and are studying how resistant and susceptible trees are affected by drought .
Broader Impacts The southwestern US is in the midst of a drought similar to those predicted to increase throughout much of the US by many climate change models .
The principles learned by studying pinyon pine and its associated community can be used to make informed decisions regarding the consequences of these predicted climate changes .
In addition , because NAU is located in an area with a diverse population including 42 Native American tribes , we propose totrain and mentor students drawn from a diversity of under-represented groups .
Our ability to do so will be enhanced by programs already in place , including an NSF-sponsored University Mentoring in Environmental Biology grant targeting under-represented groups and an NAU grants program that promotes undergraduate research .
Georges Bank supports a rich fishery because ( 1 ) large portions of the bank are shallow enough that light-limitation of phytoplankton is usually not important ; ( 2 ) deep waters rich in inorganic nutrients are available for mixing onto the bank ; and ( 3 ) the Bank 's clockwise circulation can retain the planktonic stages of important fish species .
The tidally mixed front ( TMF ) is central to the productivity of Georges Bank through the processes of nutrient injection in the north and retention of larvae on the south flank .
These two regions are connected by a circulation pathway along the front in which nutrients lead to phytoplankton and zooplankton growth , creating a donut-shaped region of high production surrounding the crest .
It is suggested that the productivity of this pathway is the result of northern edge nutrient injections and is susceptible to climatic influences on nutrient supply in that region .
The overall objective of this project is to understand the processes within the TMF that sustain the biological productivity of Georges Bank and the success of the target species , cod and haddock .
This requires understanding how mixing and circulation within the TMF supplies new nutrients , supports primary production , and retain larvae .
GLOBEC dye tracer experiments have , for the first time , measured directly the near-bottom Lagrangian circulation and mixing in the TMF .
Results show that vertical mixing in the front , and the on-bank flow through the base of the TMF , are dynamically connected .
This study is examining the 3-dimensional dynamics of the TMF based on these measurements .
Models will help assess how the strength of the across- and along-isobath circulation sets time and space scales compatible with the development of cod and haddock larvae .
This project consists of a mix of data analysis and modeling activities .
First , dye dispersion data and simple shear dispersion models are being used to understand the link between cross-bank flow and vertical mixing .
Second , a finite-volume coastal ocean model ( FVCOM ) will be used to calculate the temporal and spatial structure of nutrient flux into the TMF , contrasting northern and southern flank inputs .
A coupled FVCOM- NPZ ( nutrient-phytoplankton-zooplankton ) model are being used to test the following hypotheses ( i ) Nutrient injections in the north are advected around the crest of the bank and lead to a plume of elevated phytoplankton and zooplankton production .
( ii ) The plume enriches the area of larval entrainment on the south flank .
If the above statements are true , then production in the plume can be altered by the nutrient content of source waters in the Northeast Channel of the Gulf of Maine , and these changes will affect the feeding environment of larval cod and haddock .
Finally , models incorporating the measured 3-D flow and turbulence fields are being used to examine spatial patterns of larval retention and define the kinds of environmental transitions that larvae experience during this process .
Morgan State University is requesting funds to develop the University 's research capacity and to increase the number of minority students granted the PhD in its Bioenvironmental Sciences and Doctor of Engineering programs .
The funds will be used to develop the research infrastructure necessary to create a Center for Biological and Chemical Sensors Research ( CBCSR ) .
The Center 's mission will be to advance the fundamental scientific and technological knowledge needed to develop new biological and chemical sensors , in order to enhance research in the bioenvironmental sciences .
The Center will be housed in the new science research annex when it is completed in Fall 2003 .
Faculty and staff of the Department of Chemistry in the School of Computer Mathematics and Natural Sciences will be responsible for coordination and administration of the Center 's activities.The Center will focus on the development of novel chemical and bio-analytical sensors to study biological and chemical processes as they relate to homeland security , environmental toxicity , improvement and enhancement of environmental monitoring and investigation of biological processes in living systems from tissue to sub-cellular levels .
The Center will implement an integrated approach to sensor science and development that will include interdisciplinary research extending from molecular design , synthesis and characterization of fluorophores and luminophores to the development of microfluidic , sol-gel , and impedance based devices .
A synergistic research program will be developed based on the following four areas of investigation 1 ) Fluorescence resonance energy transfer biological sensors based on new donor-acceptor pairs of fluorophores and luminophores ; 2 ) Incorporation of luminophores and biologically active molecules in aerogels and microfluidic devices ; 3 ) Application of the Riordan group technique to predict adhesion and molecular expression in RNA secondary structure as an aid in the design of biological and chemical sensors ; 4 ) Development of dual monitoring bio-analytical sensors based on impedance , fluorescence and near-IR spectroscopy.The three components that will be addressed in this HBCU research capacity building proposal include administration , infrastructure and collaborative research .
Funds for this project will be used to facilitate the following specific capacity building activities upgrade an existing NMR to increase research productivity , upgrade an FT-NIR to perform cross-correlation measurements , purchase a Micro-Thermal Analyzer to characterize variations in sol-gel matrices and laser ablated polymer surfaces , faculty start-up funds , exploratory research on the feasibility of using Riordan matrices to predict RNA secondary structures , travel support for faculty and student to workshops and conferences , support for graduate and undergraduate research students and to hire a consultant , and administrative and technical staff .
These activities will significantly enhance Morgan 's research productivity and thereby increase the University 's ability to effectively compete in a future NSF-CREST OIA-0236908RichardsonFunding is provided to the Potomac Institute For Policy Studies to conduct a study to define and document likely S & T trends and their impacts on national security over the next 20 years .
In order to address the goal the following questions will be addressed-What S & T trends are most likely to yield products to benefit national security ? -What S & T trends are likely to pose dangers to our society ?
-How are the important trends likely to evolve and what indicators will herald new and significant capabilities or threats ? -Who will be the most likely producer of the necessary capabilities and threats ? -Are there roadblocks in the way of scientific or technological progress that may deter these capabilities and threats ?
At least six S & T areas will be examined during the conduct of this project Advanced Materials ; Nanotechnology ; Life Sciences ; Social , Behavioral , and Economic Sciences ; Energy ; and Information Technology.The results of this study will feed into a larger study ( under multi-agency sponsorship ) aimed at suggesting ways to improve the quality of science and technology information involved in making decisions on S & T-laden issues at the national security level .
This will significantly enhance the nation 's ability to develop strategies and policies on issues with important scientific and technical content .
The theory that the many different cell-types of the body are all derived from divisions of a single fertilized egg is well described , but poorly explained .
This remarkable transformation is thought to be the result of differential regulation of the activity of genes constituting an individual 's genome .
The result is that each cell-type expresses its own array of genes required for their particular function in the body .
Decoding the rules that govern when and where a given gene will be activated or silenced is key to understanding the basis for organismal development .
Linked , non-coding DNA sequences are known to play a leading role in gene regulation .
Innumerable sequences capable of regulating gene expression have been identified .
However , the vast majority of such sequences do not function well in the natural packaging environment ( called chromatin ) in which genes normally reside .
More recently appreciated is the emerging role of the regulation of chromatin states in determining gene expression status .
However , the connection between regulatory DNA sequences and the alteration of chromatin states is still unclear .
Using highly integrated research and educational approaches , the proposed research project will investigate novel DNA sequences that appear to regulate gene expression via the alteration of chromatin structure .
Therefore , this work will help bridge the gap in the understanding of how chromatin is involved in gene regulation .
This will help bring the field closer to a more complete understanding of the development of complex organisms , such as ourselves .
This Small Grant for Exploratory Research ( SGER ) focuses on the use soft computing for developing practical economic analysis tools to support transportation infrastructure asset management .
The specific objectives of the research are to ( 1 ) develop an overall framework for the incorporation of soft computing techniques in the life-cycle cost analysis of infrastructure assets , ( 2 ) formulate a prototype hybrid soft computing algorithm for life-cycle cost analysis , and ( 3 ) compare the algorithm against traditional life-cycle cost analysis tools using simple examples to assess its practical potential .
One of the main concerns surrounding life-cycle cost analysis ( LCCA ) is the treatment of the uncertainty and subjectivity in the physical and economic aspects considered in the engineering economic analysis .
This has been addressed extensively in the literature using probabilistic approaches .
However , since some of the uncertainty is of an ambiguous nature , soft computing applications are theoretically more appropriate than the probabilistic methods .
Soft computing provides a formal approach for the treatment of both random and ambiguous uncertainty and thus is expected to yield more robust , reliable , and stable results .
Furthermore , a soft computing-based LCCA system could facilitate the incorporation of non-monetary factors , which require subjective assessments , into the analysis.Life-cycle cost analysis tools modified to treat ambiguity are expected to increase the efficiency of the infrastructure management process .
Although the work will concentrate on a specific transportation infrastructure asset , pavements , the research should have a broader impact due to the generalizability of the methods and algorithms to other types of infrastructure assets and related areas .
The knowledge acquired through the use of these tools will help agencies understand the technical and economical implications of infrastructure management decisions and the importance of efficiently managing and renewing the existing infrastructure systems .
The National Science Foundation supports the Workshop on Direct Compositionality , to be held at Brown University , June 19-22 , 2003 .
The workshop will feature 13 invited speakers .
There will also be slots for papers submitted by anonymously reviewed abstracts .
The workshop will be open to the public .
Each speaker will be the discussant for one other paper , encouraging a full debate on the issues .
The results of the workshop will be published as a book or special issue of a journal .
The focus of the workshop is the interaction of the syntactic and semantic systems .
The syntactic system is a system of rules regarding the well-formedness of various linguistic expressions ; the semantic system must relate each such expression to some meaning .
Two main hypotheses regarding this interaction have been studied in recent years .
One is direct compositionality , which posits that the two systems work together .
Each syntactic rule ( sometimes stated in a very generalized and schematic form ) is paired with a syntactic semantic rule .
On this view , larger expressions are based on smaller ones in the syntax , and the meaning of the larger expression is simultaneously composed from the meanings of its constituent parts .
A competing hypothesis is that semantic interpretation follows syntactic representation .
In the 1970 's and 1980 's , the former view dominated formal semantic theory , but the latter view has become increasingly accepted .
Many of the reasons for abandoning the earlier ( and arguably simpler ) view depend on a particular set of analytic tools .
The development of new tools of compositional semantics makes it time to reopen the question of the feasibility of direct compositionality .
The relevant tools include techniques from logic and techniques borrowed from the semantics of programming languages .
This workshop will bring together researchers who approach direct compositionality from multiple perspectives and researchers with expertise in a variety of analytic techniques .
The speakers include senior faculty , junior faculty , and advanced graduate students .
This is designed to foster in junior scholars and graduate students a sense of full participation in the scientific community .
Undergraduates will participate in the conference and help with its organization , enabling them to experience first-hand the excitement of scientific research .
The question of how syntax and semantics interact has implications both for models of how humans compute meanings of sentences as they process them and for the design of efficient systems of natural language understanding .
0236481YogodzinskiThis grant provides support for the acquisition of a quadrupole inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer ( QICPMS ) , to be housed in the Department of Geological Sciences at the University of South Carolina .
This project is a collaborative effort among faculty from the Department of Geological Sciences , the interdisciplinary Marine Science Program , and the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry .
The instrumentation will be used for research in the diverse fields of igneous processes , chemical oceanography , paleoclimate , and hydrogeology .
The broad goal of this acquisition is to expand the trace element and isotope tracer research capabilities of the Department of Geological Sciences , and to help build a critical mass of faculty and students that are interesting in conducting this kind of research at the University of South Carolina .
The requested funds reflect 70 % of the cost of the instrumentation ( QICPMS with collision cell ) plus three months of technician support and one month of PI salary .
The cost of the instrumentation includes factory and on-site training by the manufacturer , as well as two years of service and maintenance beyond the initial one-year warranty .
All faculty involved in this project involve both graduate and undergraduate students in their research .
The interdepartmental and interdisciplinary nature of this project provides a significant opportunity to transfer analytical expertise to geology faculty and students from the chemistry department , and at the same time , create collaborative opportunities for chemistry faculty and students in the earth and ocean sciences .
In addition to the abundant and diverse research applications that provide the primary justification for funding this project , use of the proposed instrumentation will also be integrated into the geology curriculum through some 300 and 500-level courses in geology and oceanography .
*** The work of Dr. Craig Hill , Department of Chemistry , Emory University is supported by the Inorganic , Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program of the Division of Chemistry .
The project involves new inorganic complexes and systems that catalyze transformations using the most environment friendly and economically desirable oxidants ( oxygen/air ) and solvent ( water ) .
Specifically , the project will develop three major topics .
First , multi-iron polyoxometallates ( POMs ) will be employed as very reactive catalysts for selective organic oxidations and the oxidative mineralization of carboxylic acids using oxygen in air at room temperature .
Secondly , catalytic oxidations by oxygen in water will be designed to utilize stable POM ensembles that consume acidic/basic side product produced during oxidations .
Finally , the fundamental electron transfer reactions of the POM catalysts will be determined using stop-flow methods .
The project emphasizes utilization of environmentally benign oxidants such as air and oxygenated water to oxidize organic materials , including paper bleaching .
The research will lead to great benefits to society as more environment friendly and selective catalytic processes are developed .
The research activity will provide excellent training and educational experiences to graduate students and post-doctoral associates .
PROJECT SUMMARY NSF IBN 0236029Evolutionary Biology of Insect Mating BehaviorFemale mating with multiple males within a single fertile period ( polyandry ) is a common phenomenon in animal kingdom .
Conventional wisdom assumes that males are selected to maximize their paternity , females are choosy for the best possible sire .
However , some female insects are particularly promiscuous .
Behavioral scientists and evolutionary biologists have long been puzzled by why females mate with multiple males despite potential costs such as expenditure of time and energy , reduced life span , risk of predation and contracting sexually-transmitted diseases .
In the red flour beetle ( Tribolium castaneum ) , a major pest of stored grain products , females usually obtain sufficient sperm to retain fertility for several months from a single insemination , but they copulate repeatedly even within minutes the after first mating .
Previous studies have demonstrated that polyandry in this species does not confer direct fitness benefits to the females , but enhance F1 male fitness and reduces F1 female fitness with laboratory inbred strains .
This project will examine the genetic benefits/costs associated with polyandry and post-copulatory mechanisms that lead to enhanced offspring fitness in T. castaneum .
Specific questions to be addressed are 1 ) is the fitness tradeoff between sons and daughters of polyandrous females observed in laboratory inbred strains a general phenomenon for field outbred populations , and 2 ) are the superior sons and inferior daughters sired by the same males or different males ?
This study will advance our knowledge on inter-sexual conflict and its consequences for species evolution .
This research will significantly enhance our understanding of the evolution of mating systems and reproductive strategies .
Because the red flour beetle is an important pest of stored grain products , the results help to develop new strategies for pest control through better understanding of its mating behavior and factors regulating population dynamics .
0236743MickevichThis Group Travel / Workshop grant provides partial support for a U.S. delegation of ca .
65 scientists to attend the 2002 meeting of the 6th International Congress of Systematic and Evolutionary Biology ( ICSEB-VI ) .
The title and theme of the Congress , Biodiversity in the Information Age , highlight the growing importance of Internet access to information on the species composition , phylogenetic relationships , distribution , and abundance of plants , animals , fungi , and bacteria throughout the world .
The purpose of ICSEB is to facilitate international exchange and communication among systematists and evolutionary biologists .
International and national meetings in these areas of biology are usually specialized either by taxonomic group or methodological approach .
As the previous meeting in Hungary in 1996 opened ICSEB to Eastern European Countries , ICSEB-VI will include scientists from countries in the Balkans , the Near East , Asia and the Pacific .
In the last decade , several prime issues have stimulated the scientific community to shift emphasis in their work .
These are revolutions in web-based informatics and molecular sequencing techniques , and the global biodiversity crises .
Because of the revolution in computational abilities and molecular sequencing techniques , the last decade has seen changes in evolutionary theory and major breakthroughs in our knowledge of the Tree of Life , the map of genealogical relationships among all species .
Also , unique applications of these techniques have created a new comparative approach to the study of organismal development evolutionary development or Evo-Devo .
The theme , Biodiversity in the Information Age , was chosen to reflect these recent advances in Systematics and Evolutionary Biology .
The 210 invited speakers for the 25 major symposia are among the leaders in their field , and from over 20 countries ( described on the Congress website at www.icseb-vi.biology.upatras.gr ) .
Topics to be addressed include training of the next generation of taxonomic experts ; building teams of scientists to construct the universal Tree of Life for all organisms ; exploring the creation of a web-accessible data matrix of morphological and anatomical information on all organisms ( the concept of MorphoBank , analogous to GenBank ) ; accelerating biodiversity inventories toward completion of an All-Species inventory for planet Earth .
ICSEB-VI will take place on the campus of the University of Patras in Greece from 9-16 September , 2002 , under the joint sponsorship of the University of Patras and IOSEB , the International Organization of Systematic and Evolutionary Biology .
The new Conference center and the town can accommodate up to one thousand attendees .
Abstracts of the presentations and fuller proceedings are to be posted to the conference website and to various specialty outlets and journals following the Congress .
The Kansas EPSCoR Research Infrastructure Improvement Award focuses on living systems to leverage existing research strengths in ecology , genetics , and biochemistry .
Two new thrust areas are targeted one at the interface of ecology and genetics and the other in the emerging field of lipid profiling ( lipidomics ) .
The University of Kansas ( KU ) , Kansas State University ( KSU ) , and Wichita State University ( WSU ) will participate .
The first new area focuses on functional genomic approaches to study organismal response to environmental change , and builds on the new emphasis on developmental genetics and genomics at KU and KSU .
Kansas EPSCoR will expand existing and launch new interdisciplinary projects , recruit new faculty members focusing on ecological genomics , hire bioinformatics specialists to develop methods to mesh gene expression and ecological data , and develop a training program in ecological genomics .
The second new area involves the establishment of a lipidomics research center for systematic studies of the role of lipids and lipid composition of membranes in living systems .
Researchers in plant , animal , and microbial sciences at KSU , KU , WSU , and other institutions will use the center 's capability .
Enhancements in the bioinformatics infrastructure will assist in the development of the two thrust areas .
Faculty hires in ecological genomics will complement existing expertise in the state .
In conjunction with the research infrastructure enhancement , Kansas EPSCoR plans a range of education and outreach activities , from elementary school to postdoctoral and early career faculty training .
In collaboration with Emporia State University , Kansas EPSCoR will help to plan and implement conferences and workshops for young women considering careers in science , technology , engineering , or math ( STEM ) .
Haskell Indian Nations University will place students in summer research programs at KSU , KU , and WSU , with the support of Kansas EPSCoR .
Additional collaborations are planned with community colleges and the McNair program .
Kansas EPSCoR will support graduate research assistants , post-doctoral fellows , and early career faculty in living systems research .
Finally , a series of symposia , seminars , and workshops will build an integrated education and research program in ecological genomics and lipidomics .
0236166AliceSystematic biology aims to understand relationships among species and infer their evolutionary histories followed by testing of hypotheses concerning observed patterns and causal processes .
Two important processes in plant speciation are hybridization and polyploidy ( more than two copies of each chromosome per cell ) .
Both hybridization and polyploidy have been involved in the origin of many agriculturally important crops , making an improved understanding of these processes valuable to the public , scientific , and academic communities .
This research focuses on the plant genus Rubus , a member of the Rose family .
The genus is economically and ecologically important as fruit crops ( raspberries , blackberries ) , ornamentals , food for wildlife and indigenous peoples , invasive weeds , and in early forest succession .
Rubus is considered one of the most challenging groups of flowering plants with regard to species identification and classification due to frequent hybridization , plasticity in external form , and the high incidence of polyploidy .
Dr. Alice 's goals are to infer evolutionary relationships within Rubus , examine the origins of several polyploid groups , test hypotheses of hybridization , assess trends in morphological features that may be useful in classification , and develop an informative and user-friendly web site for Rubus .
DNA sequencing of five different chloroplast and nuclear regions is proposed followed by phylogenetic analysis and hypothesis testing .
Dr. Alice has studied the evolutionary history and classification of Rubus for the past several years and his laboratory routinely employs the techniques proposed .
Data obtained largely through the efforts of undergraduate student researchers demonstrated that his approach is feasible and importantly that undergraduate students can learn and apply these techniques.The intellectual merit of the proposed activity includes the elucidation of evolutionary relationships in Rubus , from which changes to existing classifications will be proposed , examination of polyploid species and hybrids contributing insight to speciation processes , investigation of an infrequently used DNA region in phylogenetic study , and identification of morphological traits useful in classification .
The broader impacts resulting from the proposed project include active participation in all phases by three undergraduate students and one graduate student providing them direct insight into scientific research , training in highly marketable skills , and experience presenting their results at professional meetings .
Finally , a Rubus web site will be developed at Western Kentucky University for dissemination of information .
Sulfolobus shibatae Virus ( SSV ) is a Crenarchaeal virus that exists in extreme thermal ( greater than 80oC ) and acidic ( pH < 3.0 ) environments such as the ones found in Yellowstone National Park .
While SSV1 is the best characterized of any Crenarchaeal virus , the current understanding of these extremely unique viruses is very limited .
Genomic sequence analysis of SSVs and most other viruses from extreme thermal environments fails to find homologues in the publicly available data bases for the vast majority of the putative open reading frames ( ORFs ) .
Thus , most of the SSV1 viral proteome , 30 of 34 ORFs , have yet to be assigned any function , and the roles that these proteins play in the viral life cycle remains a mystery .
Using X-ray crystallography , this project seeks to identify structural homologues for member of the SSV1 proteome , thus providing insight into their possible function .
The structural studies are being supplemented by the production of polyclonal antisera for each of these proteins , with subsequent analysis of their expression patterns and function with respect to the viral life cycle .
Together , these data will begin to provide an understanding of the SSV1 life cycle at the molecular level .
Broader Impact Viruses of extreme thermophiles can serve as model systems for understanding the biochemistry and molecular biology required for life at high temperatures , thus this research will help to open a window onto some of the most fundamental processes of the still poorly understood Crenarchaeota .
The structural biology investigated in this project will be incorporated in the undergraduate educational activities .
Additionally , this project will provide outstanding training opportunities to students at different levels , including summer research experience for Native American students from Montana .
ABSTRACTPROPOSAL NUMBER 0242000INSTITUTION University of California at BerkeleyNSF PROGRAM ECONOMICSPRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR Jones , Charles IPROPOSAL TITLE Growth , Capital Shares , and A New Production FunctionFour stylized facts , taken together , constitute a puzzle in modem growth theory ( 1 ) some countries can grow at a relatively stable average rate for a long time , ( 2 ) contrary to conventional wisdom , factor payments as a share of GDP are not constant over time in most countries and typically exhibit large trends for several decades , ( 3 ) estimates of the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor are often less than unity , ( 4 ) the price of capital equipment relative to that of consumption is falling , suggesting that some technical change is embodied in equipment capital , a phenomenon often called investment-specific technical change .
For a neoclassical growth model to exhibit a steady state , either technical change must be entirely labor augmenting in the long run , or the production function must be Cobb-Douglas .
To get steady growth in the presence investment-specific technical change , the production function should be Cobb-Douglas ; however , this is inconsistent with Facts 2 and 3 .
This research consists of three projects that document and resolve this puzzle .
The first project will create a new dataset on factor payments to capital and labor for a large number of countries , both at the aggregate and industry levels , over as long a time as possible .
This is important because Fact 2 runs counter to the conventional wisdom it is commonly accepted that capital shares are relatively constant over time .
The second project proposes a new production function that is consistent with all four stylized facts .
Factor shares and estimates of the elasticity of substitution are driven by short-run properties of the production function .
However , requirements for steady-state growth involve the shape of the long-run production function .
The production function proposed here exploits this difference .
The short-run elasticity of substitution responsible for factor pricing is less than one .
In the long run , additional substitution possibilities arise and production occurs with a Cobb-Douglas structure .
The third project explores the microfoundations for this new production function .
A production technique , with a low elasticity of substitution , may be appropriate for a given input mix .
To produce with a very different input mix , a new production technique may be required .
The shape of a given technique governs the short-run elasticity of substition , while the long- run elasticity of substitution is determined by the distribution of newly discovered techniques .
A necessary condition for steady growth is that new techniques are distributed according to a Pareto distribution .
This same distributional assumption generates a long-run production function that takes the Cobb-Douglas form .
This research will resolve some of pressing puzzles in growth theories that seem to be inconsistent with the observed facts .
A three-year funding period is being requested so that the PI can expand and modify his existing simulation code in order to relax key assumptions that were previously implemented only because of computational constraints .
His numerical simulations describing the interaction of small-scale gravity waves with minor species and related chemical processes in the mesopause region ( 90 km altitude ) are the most complete and realistic to date .
Quite apart from causing large , highly nonlinear oscillations in minor species number densities , the waves drive a large downward transport of minor species through the effects of dissipation .
In spite of the fact that the model simulates time-dependent interactions between dynamics and nonlinear chemistry , the model uses linear ( versus nonlinear ) dynamics and a very limited number ( or incomplete set ) of chemically active minor species .
These simplifications have been necessary in order to be able to run the code within a reasonable amount of time on stand-alone personal computers .
However , to gain a complete understanding of the interactions and in order to include both physical and chemical processes that are known to be important in this region of the atmosphere , these two idealizations will have to be relaxed .
This will increase the computational burden well beyond the limits of personal computers , requiring multiprocessor computers for faster , efficient computations .
The PI is thus proposing to purchase a relatively inexpensive turn-key multiprocessor machine to assist them in the in-house development and testing of code required to increase the level of realism in their model , and subsequently transfer the code to faster super-computers at the National Center for Atmospheric Research .
The proposed work falls into the Applications in Science and Engineering ( AP ) section of the small class category of ITR proposals , and is most closely related to the Aeronomy Program of the Atmospheric Science Division within the Directorate for Geosciences .
This project will develop a technique for predicting the energization of solar wind ions in the Earth 's bow shock and the trasport of the energized ions into the magnetosphere .
The project can be divided into 5 objectives ( 1 ) determine how wolar wind ions are energized at the quasi-parallel bow shock , ( 2 ) map the connection from the quasi-parallel shock to the magnetospheric cusp and the ionospheric footprint of the cusp , ( 3 ) determine how the energized ions are transported from the shock region into the cusp , ( 4 ) determine the impact the accelerated ions have on the ionosphere as a function of solar wind conditions and the orientation of the interplanetary magnetic field , and ( 5 ) develop a technique for predicting energetic ions in the cusp based on solar wind conditions .
The project will utilize data from a variety of satellites and will include a collaboration with Slovak scientist , Dr. K. Kudela , who will help with the access and interpretation of data from the Interball satellite .
Three-dimensional hybrid simulations will be used to model the shock heating and transport processes and the model results will be compared with the satellite data .
In this project , funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry program of the Chemistry Division , Zwier will conduct experimental research on the conformational preferences and isomerization dynamics of flexible biomolecules ( dipeptide , tripeptide , triamide , and depsipeptide ) cooled in a gas phase supersonic expansion .
These molecules are sufficiently large to have significant conformational complexity to bridge the gap between small molecules and the complexity of large ones such as proteins .
An ultraviolet chromophore will be incorporated in the molecules , thereby enabling sensitive detection via laser induced fluorescence or resonant two-photon ionization spectroscopy .
The dynamics of conformational isomerization will be studied with IR-UV hole filling spectroscopy and IR-induced population transfer spectroscopy .
The results of this work will be applicable to problem of protein folding and may provide information about the laser control of molecular shape , with possible applications to a variety of areas including information storage .
Graduate and undergraduate students will participate in this research .
They will thereby acquire valuable experience in preparation for advanced studies or for entry into the scientific/technological workforce .
ABSTRACTFreedman , RichardNStars Understanding the L-dwarfs and T-dwarfsAST-0086234Dr .
Freedman is producing a model spectral catalog for L-dwarf and T-dwarf stars .
Also known as 'brown dwarf stars , ' such objects are below the hydrogen-burning limit for normal stars .
To facilitate the discovery of and subsequent follow-up research on brown dwarfs Dr. Freedman and colleagues are computing a library of high-resolution spectra covering the wavelength regime of 0.5-1000 micrometers appropriate for objects with effective temperatures ranging from 500-2200 K and metallicities ranging from -2 < [ Fe/H ] < 0.5 .
The opacity of alkali metals and the influence of dusty condensates are included in the calculations .
The resulting model spectra are compared to observed spectra of L- and T-dwarfs over the full range of L- and T-dwarfs .
The results are distributed to the scientific community via the web.Funding for this project was provided by the NSF Stellar Astronomy & Astrophysics ( AST/SAA ) program through the joint NSF/NASA Nearby Stars ( NStars ) initiative , and the NSF Mathematical & Physical Sciences Directorate Office of Multidisciplinary Activities ( MPS/OMA ) .
0242964 GarnerDescription This award supports a cooperative research project between Dr. Philip Garner , Department of Chemistry , Case Western Reserve University ( CWRU ) , Cleveland , Ohio , and Dr. Ozdemir Dogan , Department of Chemistry , Middle East Technical University ( METU ) , Ankara , Turkey .
The objective of this joint project is to develop an effective catalytic asymmetric reaction for the synthesis of pure pyrrolidines .
The development of means of preparation of substituted pyrrolidines in high purity would be a major achievement , as the pyrrolidine substructures are found in many bioactive natural products and synthetic drug structures .
Scope Part of the catalyst development work will be conducted in the U.S. by Hasan Koyuncu , who is a Turkish graduate student in the Dogan group .
He will spend three months each year in the Garner laboratory , and his work will be part of his Ph.D. thesis with Professor Garner acting as Mr. Koyuncu 's co-advisor .
This experience abroad will contribute to his professional development .
The visits by Dogan and Garner to each other 's laboratories will be used for group discussions relating to the project , and for departmental seminars .
These activities will foster the growing research interactions between METU and CWRU .
The project is funded by the Office of International Science and Engineering and the Division of Chemistry .
This research is focused on a study of mountain-wave induced rotors in the lee of the Sierra Nevada .
Rotors are intense low-level horizontal vortices that form along an axis parallel to and downstream of a mountain crest .
While they are known to be very hazardous to aviation , there have been few quantitative observational and theoretical studies of this phenomenon .
As a result , understanding of rotor structure and rotor dynamics is relatively incomplete , and the ability to forecast rotors shows little skill.This study will be conducted using observations and numerical simulations .
The observations will be collected in and upstream of the Owens Valley , which lies directly to the east of the southern Sierra Nevada .
The eastern slopes of the southern Sierra Nevada are the tallest , steepest quasi-linear topographic barrier in the contiguous United States .
The westerly winds that blow across the Sierra Nevada frequently generate large-amplitude mountain waves and strong rotors over the Owens Valley.Two major objectives of this project are to ( 1 ) establish quantitative characteristics of the rotor behavior including the location and the frequency distribution of the rotor-inducing mountain-wave events , and ( 2 ) evaluate the extent to which current operational mesoscale models can reliably forecast the occurrence of rotors .
The first major objective will be accomplished with a small field experiment involving the installation of an array of automatic weather stations and wind profilers in the Owens Valley and radiosonde launches to sample the upstream flow .
The numerical modeling effort in support of the second objective is designed to determine whether deficiencies in the model forecasts ( as revealed by comparison with the observational data ) are due to an inadequate representation of the large-scale flow striking the mountains or to difficulties in the detailed computation of the mountain waves and rotors themselves.The results of this project will serve as a basis or improving the forecasting capability of numerical models applied to steep topography .
One consequence of such improvement would be to provide better forecasts of severe aviation hazards in mountainous terrain .
This project will develop a technique for predicting the energization of solar wind ions in the Earth 's bow shock and the trasport of the energized ions into the magnetosphere .
The project can be divided into 5 objectives ( 1 ) determine how wolar wind ions are energized at the quasi-parallel bow shock , ( 2 ) map the connection from the quasi-parallel shock to the magnetospheric cusp and the ionospheric footprint of the cusp , ( 3 ) determine how the energized ions are transported from the shock region into the cusp , ( 4 ) determine the impact the accelerated ions have on the ionosphere as a function of solar wind conditions and the orientation of the interplanetary magnetic field , and ( 5 ) develop a technique for predicting energetic ions in the cusp based on solar wind conditions .
The project will utilize data from a variety of satellites and will include a collaboration with Slovak scientist , Dr. K. Kudela , who will help with the access and interpretation of data from the Interball satellite .
Three-dimensional hybrid simulations will be used to model the shock heating and transport processes and the model results will be compared with the satellite data .
The South Carolina Advanced Technological Education ( SC ATE ) Center of Excellence is a statewide systemic initiative designed to increase the quantity , quality , and diversity of engineering technology graduates throughout the state 's 16 technical colleges .
An integrated , problem-based curriculum , collaborative teaching strategies , and extensive active learning techniques together with faculty and student teamwork form the cornerstone of the SC ATE 's strategy to recruit , retain , and graduate more students in engineering technology programs.SC ATE has achieved critical milestones on the road to designing and implementing a model of faculty development , program improvement , and curriculum reform .
The key to SC ATE success continues to be reform-ready faculty acting as change agents for development and delivery of innovative engineering technology curriculum and promoting program improvement .
SC ATE 's critical lesson learned is the proven effectiveness of exemplary faculty leading grassroots reform.The Center has identified four critical success factors ( essential accomplishments ) that is guiding its work ( a ) continuing development of pre-engineering technology and first-year engineering technology curricula ; ( b ) faculty development that supports the most effective teaching methodologies and creates learning environments that model the workplace ; ( c ) recruitment and retention of students , particularly women and minorities ; and ( d ) development of a statewide model to create a seamless pipeline for educational opportunities for students to become well-qualified engineering technology graduates .
Framing effects are said to occur when equivalent redescriptions of objects or outcomes lead to different preferences or judgments .
For example , a medical treatment will be seen more favorably when described as resulting in 75 % survival rather than 25 % mortality .
Such effects have traditionally been seen as irrational .
However , preliminary research conducted by the PI has shown that even logically equivalent attribute frames can implicitly convey , or leak , normatively relevant information .
For instance , speakers were more likely to select the 75 % survival frame to describe a new treatment outcome if it led to a higher , rather than a lower , survival rate relative to an old treatment .
Moreover , listeners absorbed this leaked information They were more likely to infer that the old treatment led to a lower survival rate when the new treatment was described in terms of % survival rather than % mortality .
The objective of the proposed research is to deepen and broaden our understanding of the role of information leakage in framing effects .
Framing effects , rather than indicating irrational behavior , may instead indicate behavior that is rational , much richer , and more adaptive than previously thought .
Present models of mid-ocean ridge spreading processes fail to explain some major features , such as narrow axial highs .
This failure stems from not considering magmatic loading of the near axis region and form not focusing on that region with sufficient spatial and temporal resolution in numerical models .
New conceptual models for narrow high and axial summit troughs are suggested involving periodic collapse of thin axial lithosphere under the weight of magmatic loads .
New model predictions will be tested against data on fault patterns associated with narrow axial highs , the distribution of axial summit troughs , the age distribution of lava flows as a function of shape of the axis , and the degree of rotation of sections of fast-spreading crust seen in tectonic windows .
The investigators will study the effects of gravity wave packets on the chemical exothermic heating in the mesopause region .
Chemical exothermic heating is an important heat source in the mesopause region , and there is much evidence that gravity waves interact with hydroxyl nightglow emissions .
A detailed , time-dependent study including fully nonlinear chemistry required to understand and quantify these wave effects has yet to be performed .
The investigators will use state of the art models specifically designed for these tasks , including the Spectral Full-Wave Model , which simulates a time-dependent gravity wave packet , and a time-dependent , nonlinear , 2-D chemistry model that solves the coupled continuity equations of chemically active minor species .
Hydroxyl chemistry will be included in the modeling to better understand the complex interplay between dynamics and airglow emissions .
The main thrust of the research will be to understand the forcing of the mean state minor species distributions and associated chemical exothermic heating due to waves .
The results are relevant to global climate modeling used to study the effects of global change on the middle atmosphere .
0242109 NayfehDescription This project supports a cooperative research project between Professor Ali Nayfeh , Department of Engineering Sciences and Mechanics , Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University ( Virginia Tech ) , Blacksburg , Virginia and Dr. Khaled Asfar , Department of Mechanical Engineering , Jordan University of Science and Technology , Irbid , Jordan .
They plan to conduct experimental and theoretical investigations to study the mechanism for the transfer of energy for high-frequency to low-frequency modes in composite structures .
The mechanism responsible for this energy transfer is unique as it is neither an autoparametric resonance , nor an external combination resonance , nor a parametric combination resonance .
Composite structures to be investigated are mainly beams and plates with various boundary conditions .
Analytical and experimental work that was done at Virginia Tech revealed such energy exchange in multi-degree-of-freedom systems due to combination and internal resonances and interaction between widely-spaced modes .
Such energy exchange may alter the behavior of the system leading to undesirable consequences .
Effects of various composite material parameters on the energy exchange will be studied in order to improve the design process of such materials.Scope The project involves analytical and experimental approaches , and combines the complementary expertise of the US and Jordanian scientists .
Dr. Nayfeh has contributed significantly to the understanding of various energy transfer mechanisms .
The application to composite structures is of particular interest .
The project would enhance the international exchange of ideas and expertise in the general field of nonlinear vibrations , and would strengthen the ties between the PI 's research group at VPI and the Jordan University of Science and Technology .
The research will add the study of composite materials to a large volume of research that has been performed in the last three decades on nonlinear modal coupling in mechanical structures of homogeneous materials .
Under the direction of Robert Whallon , Eugene Morin will collect data for his doctoral dissertation .
He will continue to analyze faunal material from Saint-Cesaire and Quincay , two sites located in southwestern France documenting the Middle to Upper Paleolithic transition ( roughly between 40,000 and 32,000 BP ) , an episode corresponding , according to many , to the replacement of Neanderthals by modern humans .
Numerous changes , biological as well as cultural , occurred during this short time period .
In its cultural dimension , most notable are the emergence of art and bone technology , an increase of stylistic patterning , and the diversification and standardization of stone tools .
Using a set of material predictions based largely on fauna , the research examines and tests the presumed replacement of Neanderthals in Western Europe .
Given the low productivity of the environment in southwestern France during this time period , the incursion of early modern humans into an area already occupied by Neanderthals would have increased the local population far beyond the carrying capacity of the environment and led to overpopulation .
Based on this argument , it is suggested that the Neanderthals redefined their ecological niche in order to avoid direct competition with modern humans .
This would be reflected , in a predictable manner , in archaeological faunal assemblages .
Two types of comparisons are carried out to test this hypothesis .
First , we should observe a decline , as a result of the modern human incursion , of high caloric return species ( e.g .
large herbivores ) in late Neanderthal assemblages as well as more efficient utilization of carcasses and , possibly an increase in scavenging .
In sum , compared to early modern human faunal assemblages , late Neanderthal assemblages should be characterized by significant subsistence stress .
Saint-Cesaire and Quincay are ideal sites to conduct a detailed study of Neanderthal and modern human adaptation since the latter have been carefully excavated and because animal bone is well preserved.This research will contribute to a better understanding of human origins , especially in regard of the interaction between the social , demographic , and economic aspects involved in the migration of a population .
At the general level , this project will deepen the anthropological study of hunter-gatherers and add to our body of knowledge on speciation processes in human evolution .
In trying to strictly test a hypothesis derived from the replacement model , this kind of study has great potential to contribute in resolving the debates on the nature of the Middle/Upper Paleolithic transition since its assumptions and bridging arguments are clearly exposed and tested.The grant will also contribute significantly to training a very promising young scientist .
0093762HespanhaIn this proposal we delineate a five year-research and education plan in the area of Automatic Control .
The overall objective of this plan is to build the foundation for a career devoted to scientific research and its integration in the educational program at the University of Southern California.Our research and education efforts will be focused in the area of hybrid control systems , i.e. , systems that combine continuous dynamics with discrete logic .
We are particularly interested in supervisory control algorithms that utilize discrete logic for the purpose of online learning and adaptation .
The use of logic in this context was proposed in the control literature more than fifteen years ago .
Most of the early work was of a theoretical nature , motivated by the desire to construct universal controllers capable of stabilizing very large classes of systems .
The universality of these controllers was achieved at the expense of very poor performance and the resulting algorithms could not be used in most practical applications .
Since then a great deal of progress has been made in this area and now supervisory control is actually proposed as a technique to attain very high performance and robustness to sudden changes in the process or the control objectives.The scientific goal of our research is to develop a framework to expedite the analysis and design of learning algorithms that utilize switching and logic .
Towards this end we will isolate the fundamental issues that arise in the design of supervisory control algorithms and explore them in a systematic fashion .
We show in this proposal that although many of the algorithms proposed in the literature originate from fundamentally different approaches , they share key structures and exhibit several common properties .
A common framework will provide a better understanding of their key features and limitations .
We isolate here two specific topics that we judge crucial for the wide establishment of supervisory control1 .
Extend the domain of application of these algorithms to the control of complex nonlinear systems .
In particular , when only output-feedback is available and/or when there is significant measurement noise and unmodeled dynamics.2 .
Develop theoretical tools to optimize the performance of these systems .
Here , performance should be understood both in a transient and in an asymptotic sense .
EIA-9973470Crisman , JillNortheastern University CISE POWRE Visual Behaviors for Robotic Motion Control The long term objective of the proposed research is to use visual behaviors to control personal robots .
The POWRE funding will help the PI to restart her research program , after she has had to take an extended leave due to medical conditions of her children .
The proposed work will specifically study visual behaviors for gaze control of a robot head , navigation control of a mobile base , reaching control of a manipulator , and grasping control of a robot hand .
The objectives are to ( i ) determine if real-world , general purpose robotics problems can be solved using visual behaviors , ( ii ) discover the features of target objects that can be reliably tracked and used for visual behaviors , and ( iii ) discover a fundamental set of visual behaviors necessary to perform general purpose object retrieval and delivery .
To meet these objectives , a general purpose mobile robot will be developed and used in daily navigation task .
The robot will interact with person who will select visual behaviors and target objects from video images .
A manipulator and robot hand will be used to perform experiments in visual behaviors for reaching and picking up objects .
Better generic target tracking algorithms will also be developed .
Finally , the idea of tracking multiple targets through image sequences will be investigated and integrated with visual behaviors .
This award supports the investigation of the dishcarge variability of Ross Ice Streams over the last millenium , using a combination of numerical simulation and satellite remote sensing of flow features on the Ross Ice Shelf .
The proposed collaborative research will use the Ross Ice Shelf record of flow variability to deduce variations in ice stream discharge over the last 1000 years .
Changes in ice stream discharge disrupt flow of the ice shelf , in both profound and subtle ways , distorting flow features and changing creavasse patterns .
The result is an integrated record of many changes over the lifetime of the ice within the shelf .
Interpretations of flow-trace and crevasse geometry already made by Fahnestock and others will be used as a template for the design of numerical modeling experiments .
The primary objectives are to verify the imagery-derived history and to quantify the volume flux implied by that history .
The proposed research will improve existing concepts of ice stream discharge variability and will produce new data sets , both of which will be of use to the Antarctic glaciology community .
Landsat-7 imagery will be used to measure velocity in areas of particular interest where existing data are inadequate .
MODIS data , which has better radiometric and spatial resolution will be used to improve feature mapping on the ice shelf in sensitive areas .
9982077OtaigbeThis GOALI award , jointly supported by the Div .
of Materials Research and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences , is in the area of nanoscience .
New dynamic behavior emerges when polymers are confined in a small droplet of solution the size of a molecule or in molecular aggregates .
Solvent evaporation takes place on a time scale short enough to frustrate phase separation , producing dry pure polymer or polymer blend microparticles that are homogeneous within molecular dimensions .
This capability allows production of spherical polymer alloy microparticles with tunable properties ( such as refractive index ) simply by adjusting the relative weight fractions of the polymers in solution .
This research will develop a methodology for generating polymer and polymer blend microparticles and for probing the structure , morphology , and other characteristics of the polymer micro- and nanoparticles .
Using instrumentation developed for probing single fluorescent molecules in submicrometer droplets , the proposal will demonstrate that polymer particles of nearly arbitrary size and composition can be made with narrow size dispersion .
While the focus of this research is on polymeric systems , the microparticle generator can be easily adapted to make small organic and inorganic particles ( and hybrid systems ) .
A number of optical methodologies such as Fraunhofer diffraction , fluorescence , and conventional phase-contrast microscopy will be used to probe polymer particles immobilized on two-dimensional subrstrates or levitated in space using a three-dimensional quadrupole ( Paul ) trap .
The optical diffraction method will provide a unique look ( not possible now with conventional methods such as electron-beam microscopy ) inside a polymer particle in a measurement time schale of a few milliseconds , making it attractive to in-line production applications.The knowledge gained will be useful in addressing phase separation , the primary barrier to producing many technologically relevant and scientifically interesting homogeneous polymer blends from bulk-immiscible components in solution .
Examples of application areas of the polymer microparticles include polymer blends or alloys , biomaterials for drug delivery systems , electro-optic and luminescent devices , polymer powder spray coating , and polymer powder impregnation of inorganic fibers in composites and in polymer-supported heterogeneous catalysis .
While universities have long served as a source of scientific and technical knowledge for industry , there has been a significant rise in both the level and the formalization of knowledge transfer activities at the university-industry interface .
For the most part , however , recent research explores university-industry interactions from the perspective of the university .
Few studies examine the firm 's perspective .
As a result , understanding of the motivations of firms in technology-transfer and the ways in which industry-university interaction fits into the larger U.S. system of innovation is limited .
This study seeks to address this gap .
Leveraging organizational theory and contract theory , hypotheses are developed to explore How the firm 's internal R & D organization and innovation strategy affect its propensity to interact with universities ; how the firm 's internal R & D organization and innovation strategy affect the mode of university-industry interactions selected .
( Does the firm pursue limited transactions or long-term relationships ?
) ; and how the firm 's internal R & D organization and innovation strategy affect expectations for , and satisfaction with , the university interactions .
To conduct this study , data will be collected through a survey of the large R & D performers , both public and private , in the U.S. economy .
Empirical testing of hypotheses will contribute an understanding of how university interaction fits within the firm 's R & D strategy and examine the effect of firm strategy and organizational structure on the types of technology-transfer mechanisms employed by the firm and the ultimate relationship the firm maintains with the university .
Besides contributing to the existing knowledge base , the study will provide useful comparative information for industry R & D managers .
One or two PhD students will also be involved in this research , and outcomes will contribute to classes in entrepreneurship , strategy , and science policy .
The International Society for Risk Analysis ( SRA ) has begun the groundwork for a series of World Congresses on Risk Analysis in the 21st century .
In partnership with other scientific , governmental and professional organizations interested in risk , SRA is launching the first of this series in 2003 .
The First World Congress will be held at the Sheraton Brussels , June 22-25 , 2003 .
The unifying theme for the First World Congress is Risk and Governance , which reflects the worldwide trend toward making better use of risk-oriented concepts , tools , and processes ( derived from both research and practice ) in public decision making and risk management .
Specific objectives of the First World Congress are to ( 1 ) stimulate dialogue on emerging risk issues of worldwide interest , ( 2 ) share insights about analytic methods and decision processes used in different regions of the world , ( 3 ) demonstrate and disseminate recent advances in risk assessment , management , and communication , and ( 4 ) build an organized , international community of individuals dedicated to advancing the state of the art and promoting appropriate use of risk-related tools , concepts , and procedures .
To ensure broad participation by various critical communities and decision makers interested in risk analysis at the First World Congress , SRA will use support from the National Science Foundation to provide travel stipends in three key areas1 .
Travel and lodging support for plenary speakers , breakout leaders , and rapporteurs ; 2 .
Travel and lodging stipends for participants from developing countries and Central and Eastern European countries ; and3 .
Travel and lodging stipends for junior faculty or researchers .
ABSTRACTCTS-9985929A .
Gast/Stanford UniversityThe important interfacial properties of suspensions of colloidal crystals and liquids will be investigated .
The interfacial behavior of suspensions is of central importance in many systems such as inks , paints and ceramics where the final product depends on wetting or interaction with a substrate .
The primary goal is to understand how the phase behavior of a suspension influences its wetting and surface tension properties .
These interfacial properties will be manipulated via an electric field to produce unique and controllable contact angles and wetting processes .
This is a program that combines colloid and surface science , statistical mechanics , electrodynamics and microfluidics .
The study focuses on understanding the interplay between colloidal interactions , structure , and suspension interfacial phenomena .
The work will be extended to use patterned electrodes to spatially modulate colloidal wetting processes .
The spatially modulated electrocapillary behavior of colloidal suspensions will be exploited for interesting and novel microfluidic applications .
0242867Greene This award supports the US-India collaborative research project entitled Studies of the Vortex State vis-'a-vis d-wave Superconductivity in Epitaxial Films of La2-xSrxCuO4 ( LSCO ) .
US PI Richard Greene of the Center for Superconductivity Research ( CSR ) , University of Maryland and Ramesh C. Budhani of the Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur ( IITK ) propose to study vortex dynamics and quasiparticle tunneling in the vortex state of LSCO epitaxial films .
High quality and oriented epitaxial films of LSCO deposited with the technique of pulsed laser ablation will be used for measurements of vortex dynamics and tunneling .
While vortex dynamics will be addressed at the IITK , measurements of tunneling will be undertaken at the University of Maryland .
This research draws strengths from the state-of-the-art research facilities at each institution and decades of experience of the investigators in the field of superconductivity .
The existing synergy between the two groups will facilitate realization of the stated research objectives .
0242524SussmanThis award supports a two-year international collaborative research project between Professor Mark Sussman at Florida State University and Professor Mitsuhiro Ohta of the Muroran Institute of Technology in Hokkaido , Japan .
They will undertake a computational study of bubble and drop dynamics in inelastic and viscoelastic non-Newtonian fluid systems .
The researchers propose to extend numerical methods for complex moving boundary problems in Newtonian multi-phase flow to non-Newtonian multi-phase flows , implement the methods in software , and conduct computational simulations of the flows in the light of relevant experiments .
These problems are important in industry .
For example , modeling the break-up of fluids in microscale jetting devices ( e.g .
ink-jet devices ) , modeling coalescence of bubbles and drops in extraction processes , and modeling extrusion processes .
Numerical validation studies and comparison with experiments will be used to test the validity of non-Newtonian constitutive relations .
The project brings together the efforts of two laboratories that have complementary expertise and research capabilities .
The U.S. researchers provide expertise in numerical analyses and the Japanese researchers provide expertise in the experimental areas .
The full scale , three dimensional , direct numerical simulations of jetting and extrusion processes will have direct applicability in the design of ink-jet printers and fiber spinning apparatus and provide valuable insight into the flow instability and interfacial morphology of the non-Newtonian fluids .
The project advances international human resources through the participation of a number of graduate students .
Through the exchange of ideas and technology , this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and cooperation .
Results of the research will be disseminated at scientific meetings and in scientific journals on scientific computing , non-Newtonian fluid mechanics and chemical engineering .
0218015PaulThis award supports a two-year collaborative research project between Professor Prabasaj Paul , with the Department of Physics and Astronomy at Colgate University , and Professor Daniel Nkemzi , with the Department of Physics at the University of Buea , in Cameroon .
They will investigate the application of Pade approximants to the problems of scattering of electromagnetic waves , and of photonic materials with maximal bandgaps .
The problem of electromagnetic wave scattering from rough surfaces is important to many branches of physics and mathematics .
Using some powerful mathematical techniques , the multipoint Pade approximants , the two researchers will investigate the scattering of waves off uneven surfaces with very large roughness parameters , as well as the transmission of light through regions with a spatially varying refractive index .
The Pade approximants of the scattering matrix will preserve two important properties , reciprocity and unitarity .
The investigators expect their model to yield better results than existing mathematical models that are based on a classical perturbation series .
The study combines Professor Paul 's expertise in condensed matter and quantum physics with Professor Nkemzi 's knowledge of applied mathematics , principally in wave propagation.The results are expected to add new knowledge about wave scattering from rough surfaces , and will have application to many areas of mathematics and physics .
Networked computer systems are vulnerable to malicious attack .
These attackstry to take over the control of a victim computer system by re-pointing the processor program counter ( PC ) to the attacker 's code .
This proposal explores a role for security aware compilation and processor microarchitecture in preventing unauthorized PC modifications .
The two most common instances of PC compromise arise from the corruption of ( 1 ) the return address in an activation record and ( 2 ) function pointers .
The basic approach to guarding PC is to apply an encoding function before any potential PC value ( such as return address , or function pointer table entry ) is stored in any memory location ( such as a stack frame or function pointer table in the data or heap space ) .
Any read of a memory value into the PC first has to go through a decoding function .
A compromised PC value would go only through the decoding function and hence would render the malicious attack ineffective .
This research investigates several variations of PC encoding/decoding schemes and evaluates computational overhead of these schemes and their effectiveness .
This research plans to build a hardened Linux system , gcc compiler and other public domain utilities such as Apache web server incorporating the proposed return address and function pointer protection schemes .
Prof. Baxter and his colleagues have proposed ( in a group of separate proposals ) to construct a Low Energy Neutron Scattering ( LENS ) facility at Indiana University .
If constructed , this facility would have the potential for significant impact on neutron scattering in the United States ( 1 ) It would help train the next generation of scientists who will use the Spallation Neutron Source .
( 2 ) It would provide a test facility for the development of neutron-scattering instrumentation .
( 3 ) It would provide an exploratory research tool for new scientific problems in soft condensed matter and biology that are inappropriate for tightly scheduled , large user facilities.The purpose of the present proposal is to provide the Principal Investigators with support for continuing design and engineering studies while they are awaiting the review of the final proposal needed to begin the construction of LENS .
The past decade has witnessed the development of wavelet analysis , a brand-new mathematical tool , which has been quickly adopted by diverse fields in science and engineering .
In a brief period it has reached a certain level of maturity as a well-defined mathematical subject with a strong interdisciplinary character .
Wavelets have certainly begun to make an impact in many areas , including signal processing , data and image compression .
However , wavelet application to the solution of diffcult partial differential equations ( PDE ) arising in different areas of physics and engineering has been very limited .
The objectives of this CAREER proposal are manifold .
The first objective concerns the advancement of the state of the art of wavelet-based numerical algorithms .
The second involves the application of the method to challenging engineering problems , which currently are difficult to solve using conventional numerical algorithms .
The final aim of this project is in education and dissemination of the use of wavelets in large scale scientific computing .
More specifically , our educational goals are ( a ) to develop a comprehensive graduate/upper undergraduate level course on the use of wavelet-based numerical algorithms for solving partial differential equations , ( b ) to develop and disseminate `` easy-to-follow wavelet-based codes , and ( c ) to write a textbook `` Wavelets and Numerical Solution of PDEs .
The project will consist of three parts ( 1 ) algorithmic development , ( 2 ) high- performance computing applications , and ( 3 ) course and textbook development .
In the first part of the project we plan to improve and further develop the dynamically adaptive second generation wavelet collocation ( DASGWC ) algorithm in these two areas ( a ) extension of the method to complex geometries and ( b ) adaptation of the algorithm for efficient use on massively parallel computers .
At the same time , we plan to apply the further improved second-generation wavelet collocation algorithm to the following two classes of problems ( a ) fluid-structure interaction and ( b ) micro-scale heat transfer .
These problems are chosen with an eye to testing the strength of the wavelet method and to evaluating the degree in which it can really shine over conventional numerical methods .
Finally , we will develop a course and a textbook on high- performance algorithms with particular emphasis on wavelet-based adaptive methods and their implementation in modern computational environments .
We will also maintain a web site where we will post some of the rudimentary wavelet codes for solving PDEs , homework assignments , and other relevant material .
We feel that such a service would be of immense educational value to the graduate students in engineering and science , since very few universities offer courses in scientific computing using wavelets .
Debate about the patterning of genetic diversity in human populations has centered on the importance of language , geography , and gene flow .
Because of the diversity of languages and environments , Peru is an ideal place to investigate these issues .
For this project , samples are being obtained from geographically diverse parts of Peru and from different language and ethnic groups , although the project will focus in particular on populations speaking Quechua and Aymara languages .
The general aim of this research is to examine autosomal , mitochondrial DNA , and Y chromosome markers in order to investigate the spatial distribution of present-day diversity and the extent of admixture between native and non-native peoples .
In particular , differences between male and female patterns of admixture will be studied .
In addition , hypotheses about the relationship between genetics , geography and language in the central Andes will be tested .
This project will investigate the prehistoric migrations into South American and the relationship between the language families in Peru and other parts of the Americas .
This research will be conducted at the Laboratory of Molecular Anthropology at the University of New Mexico and in Peru at the Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos and Universidad Ricardo Palma .
This project will also include training of both American and Peruvian students and public outreach through Spanish and English versions of a web page about the project .
The concentrations of raindrops and cloud droplets in the atmosphere may be regarded as random variables that fluctuate with time and location .
Recent work by Jameson and Kostinski has shown that these concentrations have probability distributions that deviate from the theoretical Poisson law that applies to purely random distributions .
The deviations are caused by the tendency of drops to concentrate in clumps or patches .
This clustering of drops complicates the problem of distinguishing between actual time and space variability of quantities such as the rainfall rate and the drop-size distribution , and the variability arising naturally from samples containing small numbers of drops .
The main objective of this project is to develop new sampling criteria for counting drops and estimating their concentration that will identify real meteorological variability and avoid the artifacts arising from small samples .
Another objective is to devise new data analysis techniques to sample clouds that are clumpy in structure and to characterize their structure .
Attention will also be given to developing sampling criteria for the proper description of drop-size distributions .
The approach is a combination of ( 1 ) analysis of data from various instruments that measure drop sizes and concentrations and ( 2 ) theoretical investigations based on Monte Carlo simulation .
The work will contribute fundamentally to cloud physics by defining accurate methods for measuring and describing the spatial and temporal structure of rain and clouds .
This project involves statistical analysis of the U.S. Supreme Court 's selection of both paid and unpaid petitions for review .
The goal of the study is to determine whether , in what ways , and to what extent the Court 's selection of unpaid cases differs from its selection of paid cases .
Numerous empirical studies have considered which case characteristics increase the likelihood that the Supreme Court will select a petition for review , and scholars have used the results of those studies to reach conclusions about the Court 's decision making process and bases for decision in selecting cases for full review .
Those studies , however , have limited their analysis to paid petitions , to the exclusion of those petitions filed by indigent litigants , the petitions in forma pauperis or IFP petitions .
Examining whether the same case characteristics have the same influence on the probability of accepting unpaid petitions illuminates the Court 's decision making process and criteria for selection , and thus adds significantly to the wealth of scholarship on the Supreme Court 's agenda-setting function .
The study also explores the accessibility of the Court to the poor and the Court 's attention to issues affecting low- income people , issues with important normative implications .
In addition to expanding upon the scholarship on political decision making , the Court 's agenda-setting function , and equal access to the Court , this study involves the creation of a dataset from primary sources , containing information on the IFP docket .
The potential role of well-defined polymeric materials in a range or advanced technologies is becoming increasing apparent .
From microelectronics , sensors , drug delivery systems , catalysts , agents for chemical warfare detection and destruction , smart surfaces , to biodegradable tissue replacements , polymeric materials are the critical component or enabling technology for the successful implementation of these applications .
This conference will focus upon recent developments in the design and applications .
This conference will focus upon recent developments in the design and synthesis of polymeric materials , biodegradability , supramolecular chemistry and polymer physics .
Such an exchange of knowledge in these critical areas by world experts will provide a springboard for future developments as well as encouraging young scientists to join this growing field.To encourage younger scientists to contribute to this blossoming field and its future directions specials emphasis will also be placed on their involvement .
We are requesting funds to supplement the travel costs for 10 postdoctoral fellows / students at $ 300 per person to attend the 2003 Gordon Research Conference ( Polymers East ) to be held at Mount Holyoke College , June 15-20 , 2003 .
This amounts to a total request for $ 3000.00 in financial support .
AbstractProposal Title Cation Separations with High Capacity Swelling MicasProposal Number CTS-0242285Principal Investigator Sridhar KomarneniInstitution Pennsylvania State UniversityThe objective of the proposed research is to synthesize and characterize novel micas for use as cation-exchange materials .
In previous work , micas with both tetrahedral and octahedral negative charge were synthesized .
The location of the charge is expected to have implications for capacity as well as selectivity of ions .
In the present work fundamental cation-exchange and equilibria in sodium-based mica exchangers with both tetrahedral and octahedral negative charges will be investigated .
Exchange kinetics and equilibria involving ions such as cesium , strontium , barium , radium , copper , nickel , and zinc will be investigated .
Micas will be characterized using X-ray powder diffraction , infrared absorption spectroscopy , differential thermal analysis , and scanning electron microscopy .
In terms of the broader impacts , the studies may lead to applications in metal recovery , catalysis , and wastewater treatment .
Because micas are stable structures , they are candidates for use in remediation of sites contaminated by radioactive species .
The educational component will involve the normal mentorin In this project , supported by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division , the PI will pursue a broad program of research in State-to-State Reaction Dynamics .
The program consists of three main areas with several subtopics .
These are 1 ) Photofragmentation , including photodissociation and photoionization dynamics ; 2 ) Hydrogen atom + Hydrogen molecule reaction dynamics .
This includes the investigation of scattering resonances , the development of improved apparatus , the investigation of the geometric phase in chemical reactions , and the study of the effects of vibrational excitation and angular momentum polarization ; and 3 ) Using improved apparatus the impact of vibrational excitation on chemical reactivity will be investigated on small molecules , such as the reaction of chlorine atoms with methane and deuterated methane molecules in mode selected excited states , and studies of the vibrational control of larger molecules such as methyl alcohol and methyl amine and their deuterated variants through their reactions with chlorine atoms .
These projects will be done with the participation of students and postdoctoral research associates .
They will thereby acquire skills and knowledge in a forefront area of physical chemistry in preparation for advanced study or employment in industry , government laboratories or academia .
Dr. Jon Zubieta , Chemistry Department , Syracuse University , is supported by the Inorganic , Bioinorganic , and Organometallic Program of the Chemistry Division for research into the solid state coordination chemistry of hybrid oxide materials .
The project will focus on the controlled synthesis of metastable but persistent extended oxide structures that are formed through the use of organic components as structure-directing building blocks .
The research focuses on broadly related classes of oxide solids ( i ) materials characterized by M/P/O ( M=V or Mo ) inorganic skeletons and ( ii ) phases with V/O or Mo/O inorganic skeletons .
In both cases secondary metal-ligand complexes or subunits will be incorporated as charge-balancing and structure-directing constituents .
The synthetic approach involves low temperature self-assembly of polyamine ligands , secondary metal cations , and the inorganic oxide sources in hydrothermal media .
The structures of the resulting materials will be determined and methods to control their structure-property relationships will be developed .
Presently , methods for the rational synthesis of two or three dimensional solid state materials are nearly absent .
This is a problem because the synthesis of extended structures must be mastered in order to realize the objectives of advanced materials science and nanotechnology , which include creating materials for catalysis , quantum electronics , optics , photonics , chemoselective sensing , and solar energy conversion among others .
The occurrence of complex inorganic oxides in the geosphere and the biosphere suggests that Nature may provide useful guidelines for the preparation of synthetic phases and for the modification of oxide microstructures .
Thus , a powerful approach to the design of novel oxide materials mimics Nature 's use of organic molecules to modify inorganic architectures .
This project will use selected molecular building blocks , which include organic compounds known to direct the structure of metal complexes , to develop a Tinker Toy methodology for preparing new materials .
In addition to the potential fundamental and practical implications of the research , the activities will impact broadly on the training of graduate students , postdoctoral associates and sabbatical fellows , in the promoting of collaborative programs , and in the development of course work , tutorials and presentations for various levels of expertise and interest .
This project is establishing a new scholarship for Computer Science , Engineering , and Mathematics Scholars .
Recipients are being chosen from candidates majoring or planning to major in Computer Science , Engineering Technology , or Mathematics ( CSEM ) .
Scholarships are available to students in both Associate of Science and Associate of Arts programs .
The objectives of the program are to1 .
Annually provide scholarships to 30 academically talented , financially disadvantaged CSEM students , including those from underrepresented groups.2 .
Provide support to CSEM scholars , enabling a minimum of 70 % of the recipients to maintain or exceed a 2.5 grade point average and persist until associate degree achievement.3 .
Provide job placement assistance to 100 % of the project participants who complete requirements and desire employment in CSEM disciplines.4 .
Provide transfer assistance to 100 % of students who complete program requirements and desire to enroll in a four-year institution.The program build upons existing recruitment , support and career placement activities at the college and integrates new programs to provide a complete infrastructure .
Candidates are being recruited through existing college recruitment efforts as well as the College Board Tutoring Partnership , a program providing college readiness tutors to local high schools , and the Jacksonville Urban Systemic Initiative .
In addition to existing student support programs present on the four campuses and three centers of the College , each scholar is paired with a faculty mentor to assist the scholar and provide guidance .
The College also has a CSEM counselor who is responsible for coordinating all support services college-wide for the scholarship recipients .
The counselor works closely with the mentors and assures all support services are fully accessed by the scholars .
In the area of career services , the scholars have access to all existing career services .
Industry partners provide internship activities and mentoring to students wishing to seek employment upon graduation with an A.S. degree .
An innovative support structure is being established built upon existing programs and partnerships improving the success of students in these demanding disciplines .
0220446 GarvineMixing and circulation in the Delaware Coastal Current ( DCC ) , a buoyant coastal jet , will be studied using a combination of numerical modeling and field work ( moorings , rapid surveys , and purposeful dye releases ) followed by analysis and interpretation of results from the two approaches .
Working hypotheses are that mixing between the coastal buoyant discharge and ambient shelf waters is larger during upwelling than downwelling events , that this mixing during upwelling is primarily concentrated at the offshore plume boundary , and that the conservation of buoyancy is principally a balance between horizontal advection and vertical diffusion .
Moorings will include standard current meters and bottom-mounted acoustic Doppler current profilers ( ADCPs ) .
There will be 5 moorings , three parallel to the DCC and three perpendicular .
Multiple conductivity-temperature-depth recorders ( CTDs ) and temperature sensors will also be deployed on both taut and slack moorings .
At the northernmost mooring , two ADCPs will allow estimation of the Reynolds stresses using Stacey 's method .
ADCP bin spacing will be 0.5 m allowing resolution of 1m eddies .
Forty-five kilograms of Rhodamine dye will be released during each upwelling or downwelling event selected for study .
This dye will be traced for 4-5 days .
There will be two cruises and mooring deployments .
One upwelling dye study will occur during year 1 and one upwelling and one downwelling experiment during year two .
A previously utilized version of ECOM3d , configured for the DCC , will be used to analyze the dye study results .
Significant effort will be devoted to comparing different turbulent closure schemes .
After the model is calibrated , it may be used for sensitivity studies .
Careful comparison and interpretation of field and model results will conclude the study .
0220563 ClarkeData analysis and modeling will be used to understand the interannual variability of coastal flows , particularly those associated with El Nino - Southern Oscillation phenomena , along the west coast of the Americas and the South Australian Bight .
The data sets for characterizing this variability include many decades of coastal water level data , a decade of altimetry , the California Coastal Fisheries Investigation data set , and the Canadian line-P data set .
The models to be used will include an improved version of the existing Clarke and Van Gorder model , including expected dependence on background velocity and sloping stratification , and a statistical model .
Existing theory predicts transmission of an equatorial signal along the coast , but not propagation of the signal , as observed .
This discrepancy between theory and observation will be explored .
Gene expression in nearly all eukaryotes requires the excision of introns from nuclear precursor messenger RNAs ( pre-mRNAs ) to produce functional mRNAs .
The introns are excised by the spliceosome , which is a very large , macromolecular complex composed of five small nuclear ribonucleoproteins ( snRNPs ) and many proteins .
Each snRNP is itself composed of a small nuclear RNA ( snRNA ) and several proteins .
A fundamental question regarding pre-mRNA splicing is how the active catalytic site of the spliceosome is formed .
The focus of this project is on interactions between two spliceosomal components ( Snp1p and Prp8p ) that may contribute to the formation and activation of the pre-catalytic spliceosome .
The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae is an ideal organism for these studies because genetics and biochemistry can be used in tandem to study dynamic and transient interactions .
An interaction between Snp1p ( a protein of the U1 snRNP ) and Prp8p ( a protein of the U5 snRNP ) , which was discovered in the previous grant period , is hypothesized to be important for association of the U1 and U5 snRNPs in the spliceosome .
It may help dock the U5 snRNP onto the developing spliceosome , and promote rearrangements leading to formation of the spliceosome 's catalytic site .
One such rearrangement is the 5 ' splice site ( SS ) switch when the pre-mRNA 's 5 ' SS switches from pairing with U1 snRNA to U6 snRNA .
Preliminary results suggest that the Prp8/Snp1 interaction is important in destabilizing the U1/5'SS duplex as part of this switch .
Mutations or inhibitors will be assayed to correlate functional changes with physical changes in the association of Prp8p with Snp1p .
To map the region ( s ) of Prp8p required for interaction with Snp1p , a library of random prp8 mutations will be screened for those altering the interaction via a novel , high-throughput assay .
Candidate mutations will be further assessed by a combination of in vivo and in vitro assays.A notable percentage of human genetic diseases including some types of retinitis and thalassemias are due to defects in pre-mRNA splicing .
Furthermore , alternative splicing contributes to the development and life cycles of many organisms as well as to biodiversity .
Thus understanding the basic mechanism of splicing will contribute to our understanding of several biological systems and , in the long-term , contribute to improving human health .
The proposed research will also make several contributions to other areas of science and society .
The development of a high-throughput assay will be a collaborative effort using instrumentation invented at the host institution .
Results generated by this assay will be disseminated both by traditional scientific publication and by a website specifically designed as a database for yeast spliceosomal components and their interactions .
The research will be conducted at an EPSCoR and designated minority institution .
Thus it is likely that some of the students participating in the proposed research will be from minority groups .
Aerobic anoxygenic photoheterotrophs ( AAPs ) , and their characteristic pigment , bacteriochloropyll a ( BChla ) , were recently discovered throughout the surface waters of the open ocean ( Kolber , 2000 ; Kolber , 2001 ) .
AAPs comprise upwards of about 11 % of the total microbial community , they are globally distributed in the euphotic zone , and display high levels of photosynthetic activity .
More than twenty isolates have been obtained from different ocean basins .
These organisms are facultative photoheterotrophs , and represent a potentially significant , but hitherto unrecognized component of the marine microbial community .
Their potential role in the ecology of the upper ocean is determined by their contribution to the energy and carbon fluxes , and by their interactions with other components of marine ecosystems .
To elucidate this role , this project is investigating mechanisms of photosynthesis , carbon fixation , and respiration in AAPs , to identify factors controlling expression of phototrophy vs. heterotrophy , and to estimate the extent of AAP-specific energy , carbon , and redox under varying environmental conditions .
AAPs are readily cultivated on organic-poor media .
The investigators are establishing a library of the open ocean isolates , and characterizing the phylogenetic relationship between AAPs from different geographical regions .
AAPs use photosynthesis to produce ATP and to fix CO2 .
The investigators are characterizing the photosynthetic properties of AAPs , evaluating the effect of light on their carbon metabolism , and investigating the effect of photosynthesis on the incorporation of dissolved organic material ( DOM ) .
Where DOM is abundant , AAPs perform mostly heterotrophic metabolism , respiring the available organic carbon .
When DOM is limited , AAPs synthesize photosynthetic pigments and reaction centers , shifting their metabolism toward phototrophy .
The investigators are assessing the extent and the factors controlling these transitions .
Unable to oxidize water , AAPs rely on other substrates to serve as electron donor ( s ) .
Although most of the photosynthetic electron transport in AAPs is cyclic , external electron donors are necessary to replenish the electrons lost to photosynthetic carbon fixation , or to external electron acceptors .
The researchers are investigating which of the organic/inorganic reductants present in the upper ocean serve as potential electron donors to AAPs , and explore the AAP-mediated redox reactions , with particular emphasis on oxidation of the reduced sulfur species , and reduction of iron and nitrogen species .
Phototrophy alleviates AAPs ' dependence on the organic carbon , reducing the rates of carbon remineralization in the upper ocean , thus affecting the extent of new production .
If effective in reducing iron and nitrogen species , AAPs will also affect the physiology of oxygenic phototrophs .
By addressing these questions , this project is providing the most basic knowledge regarding the potential role of AAPs in the upper ocean ecology .
0220680 QiuThe overall goal of the Kuroshio Extension System Study ( KESS ) is to identify and quantify the dynamic and thermodynamic processes governing the variability of and the interaction between the Kuroshio Extension and the recirculation gyre .
Investigators from three US institutions will deploy a state-of-the-art array consisting of moored-profiler and current-meter moorings and inverted echo sounders equipped with near-bottom pressure and current sensors .
Profiling floats will monitor the temperature and salinity structure in the recirculation gyre south of the Kuroshio Extension .
The KESS array is designed to use these tools synergistically to observe the Kuroshio Extension in a more complete way than any one of them could do alone .
In particular , the Inverted Echo Sounders will map features of the jet as they evolve and , in combination with the Moored Profilers , will quantify the cross-frontal fluxes , while the profiling floats will monitor the upper ocean structure around the Kuroshio Extension and its recirculation gyres .
KESS will use these combined observations to identify and quantify the dynamic and thermodynamic processes governing the variability of , and the interaction between , the Kuroshio Extension and the recirculation gyre .
The proposed approach makes extensive use of satellite data ( surface temperature and sea-surface height ) .
The investigators will also collaborate closely with Japanese scientists studying the overall Kuroshio system .
The measurements from the KESS array will guide future planning for a long term observational program as part of CLIVAR .
The Industry/University Cooperative Research Center ( I/UCRC ) for the Management of Information at the University of Arizona has been an I/UCRC for the past five years and will continues to follow the model of the I/UCRC program .
The Center 's goal is to create knowledge , methodologies , practices and software to support individuals , organizations and society in the collaborative use of information technology.Research in the area of collaborative computing is an integral part of the development of the office , school and government of the future .
Current research centers within the Center include collaborative computing , knowledge management , and technology-supported learning .
In the past five years , the Center has developed a synergistic partnership between university researchers and industry users through its industry relevant research and its structure .
Research projects are developed and pursued with significant input from the industry partners .
Interactions of Meddies with SeamountsGeorgi Sutyrin URIWilliam Dewar FSUThis study will address the dynamics and transport properties of self-propagating , baroclinic-eddies in the presence of topography .
Eddies of Mediterranean origin ( Meddies ) are examples of these features .
The dynamical impact of vortex property transport and propagation of seamount-Meddy collisions have been observed buy are poorly understood .
Numerical models will be used to examine the following related topics topographic effects on Meddy transport , topographic influences on Meddy propagation , mean flow generation on topography by Meddies and consequent feedbacks .
These studies are pertinent to the question of how to parameterize tracer transport in large-scale models .
0221066/0220700 Ghil/DewarIt is proposed to study coupled mid-latitude climate variability on decadal and longer time scales .
The main hypothesis is that a critical component of this variability arises from intrinsic ocean sources .
This hypothesis will be analyzed using a numerical model of the coupled ocean-atmosphere system , focusing on the oceans ' wind-driven variability , rather than on that of the thermohaline circulation .
An intermediate complexity model is ideally suited to test this hypothesis .
The model consists of an oceanic and an atmospheric component , each of which captures the turbulent nature of the corresponding fluid .
The new feature of our proposal is in coupling these two models , and analyzing the nature of the coupled turbulence that results .
To achieve turbulence simultaneously in the two fluids requires working with reduced models of each .
One fundamental problem faced by more dynamically complete models in achieving this same goal is insufficient computer power .
Parameterization of small-scale oceanic variability as a feedback on the ocean 's general circulation and on climate thus stands as a critical problem for understanding and predicting coupled climate variability .
Initial steps will be taken towards formulating such parameterizations and testing them within this model .
Coupled general circulation models also face the problem that the phenomenology of coupled behavior is not currently known , thus complicating the analysis and interpretation of model results .
This work will contribute to a solution of this problem by providing a conceptual paradigm for coupled system behavior .
The intellectual merit of this proposal is to analyze a viable hypothesis relevant to the coupled climate problem on inter-decadal timescales .
The broader impacts of the work lie in developing scientific partnerships between two leading institutions ( UCLA and FSU ) in this field , broadly disseminating the results of our work by means of publications , seminars and presentations at national and international meetings , and addressing a problem of crucial societal importance in climate prediction .
This college has requested funds to support a new group of CSEM scholars .
Their first CSEM award created two-year scholarships for 42 students , 30 in the fall of 2000 and 12 in the fall of 2001 .
The program was open to enrolled students who completed their first year of study , and to transfer students all of whom had to meet eligibility requirements.Their current project has been designed to provide funds for 40 talented and needy students in the areas of STEM with annual scholarships and programmatic support services to graduate in a timely manner .
Eligible students will consist primarily of those who have completed their first year of study and have demonstrated financial need and academic potential .
Up to $ 4000 per year will be awarded to each scholar ( $ 3125 from NSF funds , and $ 875 from institutional funds ) .
Twenty 3- year scholarships will be awarded in the spring of years 2003 and 2004 .
This program provides scholarships to talented , low-income students majoring in computer science , computer technology , engineering , engineering technology and mathematics .
Special consideration for scholarships is given to the recruitment and retention of women and minorities in these fields .
Students are retained in the program through strategies to enhance learning experiences , by participation in cohort group learning and support , and with academic tutoring and faculty advising .
Information about the scholarship program is broadly disseminated in order to encourage other low-income students to aspire to and prepare for college careers in these fields .
The program builds on relationships with industry to assist in recruitment , retention and in providing employment opportunities .
The college also continues to foster relationships with 4-year colleges for both AS and AAS transfer students .
Ridgewater College Foundation , the financial aid office , and the counseling office , ensure timely and careful selection of scholarship winners and processing of student information .
Scholarship recipients are identified as winners on campus and in the community and are encouraged to participate in cohort groups of 15 members on each of two campuses .
An advocacy team made up of faculty , counselors , industry representatives and high school staff meet twice yearly to review progress in achieving program goals and to make recommendations for improvements .
Measurements of Turbulence and flow Structure in the Water Column of the Coastal Ocean using PIVThomas Osborn and Joseph KatzJohn Hopkins UniversityA novel and unique measurement system will be deployed to obtain measurements of oceanic turbulence .
A submersible PIV system will be used during 3 campaigns at SABSOON , a coastal observatory in the South Atlantic Bight , to measure turbulence and mean flow characteristics in the bottom 10 m of the water column and to compare these to stratification , wave climate , and circulation .
Reynolds stresses , dissipation , production , transport , and buoyancy flux will be related to elevation , mean velocity distribution , shear , stratification , Richardson number , and wave phase .
When and where a local balance between production , dissipation , and buoyancy flux holds will be explored .
The correlation , or lack thereof , between turbulent and wave stresses will be investigated .
The origin of gusts will be characterized .
In the context of Large Eddy Simulation ( LES ) modeling , subgrid scale ( SGS ) turbulent stresses will be compared to typical parameterizations .
Wave-turbulence separation will be performed using a version of the Trowbridge technique .
EIA - 0220130Barker , Lecia J.Garvin-Doxas , Ronda K. U. Colorado at BoulderTitle ITR Research on Recruiting Middle School Minority and Majority Girls into a High School IT MagnetThe overarching goal of this ITR-and ITWF-funded project is to increase the participation of women and minorities in the critical professional careers in information technology .
Increased participation in information technology ( IT ) by women and minorities will lead to broader perspectives from which IT products and services are researched , developed , and supported ; increased social equity ; and greater size and diversity in the IT professional workforce .
Prior research shows that middle school is a critical juncture for girls , since it is at middle school when girls begin to make choices more heavily influenced by stereotypical career choices and other culture-based beliefs than their genuine interests .
This project is an extensive , triangulated study examining the recruiting messages and methods that persuade middle school girls to enroll in a public computer magnet high school .
The magnet offers three information technology tracks and recruits from 22 middle schools in a diverse district serving 71,000 children ( 55 % Hispanic , 21 % white , 20 % African-American , 3 % Asian , 1 % Native American ) .
The project takes a communicative approach to the study of recruiting , in which recruiting is considered an act of persuasion .
This permits a focus on the content of messages and how they affect particular audiences ( and not others ) in particular social contexts ; the individual characteristics of the recruiter ; and the interactive processes among the recruiter , the recruited , and the social/cultural setting .
Since persuasion is a culturally situated accomplishment and therefore will vary by group , data will be gathered , analyzed , and reported according to demographic information .
The University of Colorado-Boulder 's principal campus-wide academic initiative , the Alliance for Technology , Learning , and Society ( ATLAS ) , provides much of the structure for this project .
ATLAS developed an IT certificate program open to all undergraduates ( Technology , Arts , and Media certificate ) which is attracting a surprisingly high percentage of women .
Part of the recruiting research enlists the help of these students and the TAM curriculum .
The results of the research will be widely disseminated through conference presentations , publications , and an information web site with special attention to reaching audiences that make policy decisions and can effect real change .
EIA-0220154Gusfield , DanielUniversity of California-DavisITR Algorithmic Problems in Population-Scale GenomicsNow that genomic level technologies are widely available ( for sequencing , resequencing , micro-array screening of sequences etc .
) , the dream of comparing sequence variations at the population level is starting to become a reality .
These comparisons will be used to help to identify the genetic basis of disease susceptibility , and will have additional uses .
This shift to opulation-scale genomics introduces a new set of computational problems , and provides a huge opportunity for high-impact algorithm development and research.This project focuses on novel , critical computational problems that arise in population-scale genomic data acquisition and analysis .
The specific computational problems to be addressed arise out of on-going population-scale investigations into population-level genomic variability .
It will focus on novel computational problems that have not been previously formulated and addressed , and problems where additional formulations are needed to better capture the relevant biology .
Although the algorithmic techniques will be grounded in theoretical computer science and discrete mathematics ( and the results will be of interest in those fields ) , the standards for success will be the ultimate applicability of the results in genomics .
The research will be conducted at several levels modeling and defining important problems ; finding and developing efficient algorithms ; implementing and distributing software for the most important results ; and applying the software on population-scale genomic data .
Our first focus is on problems related to computationally extracting haplotype information from genotype information , and the construction and use of haplotype maps .
The larger significance of the project will be the development of powerful computational tools for use by geneticists and gene mappers , which will help to more effectively identify the genetic bases for disease susceptibility and other important genetic traits .
Wireless sensor networking is an emerging technology that has a wide range of potential applications including environment monitoring , smart spaces , medical systems and robotic exploration .
While the technology is very promising , it raises serious challenges in networkand system design .
Sensor networks differ in many ways from than the traditional IP or voice networks , and have their unique features and requirements .
Although MAC protocols such as 802.11 and TDMA are ideal for wireless IP or voice , no MAC protocol today meets the needsof sensor networks.This project will execute a systems-driven research program to address these problems through the development of sensor-network specific MAC protocols .
Specifically , we are investigatingADAPTIVITY AND ENERGY EFFICIENCY Sensor network MACs must be adaptive in several dimensions , including energy consumption , traffic loads , and deployment density .
Energy is *the key limitation* for battery-powered sensor nodes .
The researchers are investigating and will provide designs for ENERGY CONSERVATION approaches that modify node duty cycleto conserve energy while considering user varying application traffic requirements .
One approach to energy conservation is to trigger primary node radios with a paging channel , but this requires a second radio ( with corresponding cost , space , and money requirements ) .
Sensor nodes already must operate sensors full time , so the researchers are evaluating the use of sensors ( acoustic , seismic , etc .
) as a PHYSICAL SENSOR PAGING CHANNEL.MAC INTERACTION WITH THE PHYSICAL LAYER With low-power , relatively unsophisticated radios , sensor networks applications and MAC protocols are very close to physical layer effects of radio propagation .
A serious problem with current sensor applications is dealing with linkerror conditions such as packet loss and asymmetric communication .
Energy-conserving MAC layers already keep track of neighbors , so the researchers will provide a BLACKLISTING SERVICE that allows the MAC to identify and exclude unusable links .
The researchers also will study and report on radio POWER CONTROL AND APPLICATION INTERACTIONS to understand how MACs can control neighborhood size.UNIQUE APPLICATION NEEDS OF SENSOR NETWORKS Sensor networks are fundamentally different from Internet-style networks of peer nodes in several different ways .
A first differences is that sensor networks are primarily quiescent , but they occasionally become very active whensomething is sensed .
The researchers will develop a MAC PROTOCOL WITH MULTIPLEOPERATING MODES to allow the MACs to adjust to this `` feast or famine '' traffic load .
In addition , energy conservation introduces a *directional bias* in node communication ; sleep/wake-up schedules can either add latency to all directions equally , or can allow rapid communication in one direction and slower communication in the other .
The researchers will evaluate how controllable MAC-LEVEL DIRECTIONAL BIAS INTERACTS WITH APPLICATION , exploiting it where possible.Finally , the research community has a compelling need for a publicly available , freely modifiable Sensor-MAC protocol for experimentation and simulation .
Evaluation of our ideas requires implementation and evolution of a MAC protocol .
We will provide this implementation to other researchers for use over existing sensor network radios ( with a reference implementation on the UC Berkeley Mote hardware ) and in simulation ( with a reference implementation in the ns-2 simulator ) .Thus , in addition to opening up sensor-network-specific MAC protocols as a new subfield of research , this work will serve as a catalyst for wider sensor network research that is sorely in need of an appropriate and modifiable MAC .
PI Name and Institution Farhad Ansari , University of Illinois at ChicagoProposal Number 0220036Proposal Title Miniaturized MEMS Based Fiber Optic Distributed Health monitoring System for Civil Structures Project AbstractThe primary objective of the proposed research is to develop capability for application of large numbers of sensors in a very compact and portable manner in civil structures .
This will be accomplished by condensing all the hardware components of the sensor system , which includes optical interferometer , and microprocessor modules into a single miniaturized unit .
The micro fabrication methodologies will be employed for development of the Micro Electro Mechanical Systems ( MEMS ) , which will include wave-guides , and micro mechanical optical switches and rotating micro mirrors .
This system will drive a series of distributed optical fiber sensors designed for sensing of structural perturbations within a large sensing range .
Conversion of the bulky system into the miniaturized MEMS device will allow for mass production of MEMS-sensor modules for integration within structures as needed .
The sensory system will provide monitoring capabilities for excessive strains , cracks , delaminations , deflections , uneven load distributions , thermal shocks , impact loads , and corrosion .
The outcomes of this research will have a tremendous impact on safety , maintenance , and efficient operation of the public works infrastructure systems that include myriads of facilities such as buildings , bridges , dams , tunnels , seaports , highways , pipelines , railroads , and power generation stations .
This research will provide new educational opportunities for civil engineering students , as they will learn to develop and work with modern tools to solve problems of great importance for the nation 's public works infrastructure .
Students involved in this project will benefit greatly by exposure to different research areas of engineering , particularly sensor technology , MEMS , structural testing , and industrial packaging of micro devices .
This project ( MACSTECH Scholars Mathematics and Computer Science Technology Scholarship Program ) allows the Mathematics and Computer Sciences Programs to provide 28-45 scholarships each year for four years to financially needy , academically talented students .
Both programs have been identified as economic development programs by the Board of Regents because of their strong technology emphasis and the critical need for graduates in these areas within the state of South Dakota .
MACSTECH is designed to strengthen the current programs and to provide a foundation for future success.The project contains a comprehensive management plan that incorporates student recruitment ( particularly to develop a critical mass of students in the Mathematics major and to increase underrepresented populations and women in the programs ) , develops multiple mechanisms to improve student retention at various points in their degree studies , increases the number of highly qualified double majors in Mathematics and Computer Science , and provides an extensive student enrichment and support structure.A strong retention program involving continued support for successful scholars fosters the success of those individuals to degree completion .
This is accomplished through advising , building group cohesion , and extensive use of student support services , tutoring , enrichment activities and the resources and activities of existing university programs .
Meese0220949This proposal is being jointly funded by the Arctic Natural Sciences Program , Antarctic Glaciology Program , and the Paleoclimate Program in the Division of Atmospheric Sciences .
The Greenland Ice Sheet Project 2 ( GISP2 ) depth-age scale is accurate within one per cent on an annual basis through the Holocene and into the Wisconsin and therefore has been of great interest to the paleoclimate community .
Researchers have used , and want continue to use our most valuable paleoclimate archives , the GISP2 and the Greenland Ice Core Project ( GRIP ) ice cores , to calibrate chronologies from other materials .
Because the GRIP core was drilled simultaneously and in close proximity ( 30 km ) to the GISP2 core , comparison between the two cores was expected to be similar .
However , there are segments of the cores where there is sufficient variability and the chronologies have been questioned .
This has caused confusion within the ice coring and the paleoclimate communities .
An example of these errors can be seen in the Antarctic Siple Dome core .
Like the GISP2 chronology , the Siple Dome chronology is based on annual layer counts , but the gas age chronology deeper in the core is based on correlations with the GISP2 record perpetuating the errors that exist in the GISP2 chronology .
It is critical that the GISP2 chronology be reexamined and any discrepancies be resolved , if possible .
The Principal Investigator will 1 ) use new volcanic records obtained since the completion of the original GISP2 depth-age as additional tie points for greater calibration ; 2 ) revise the Holocene portion of the GISP2 depth-age scale based on the new Berylium-10 and Carbon-14 results ; and 3 ) revisit areas of the depth-age scale where discrepancies exist between the GISP2 and GRIP ice cores based on a recent publication .
Revision of the GISP2 depth-age scale will be accomplished by reexamining areas of the core that have been identified to be in error by new data that have come available since the completion of the original GISP2 chronology .
Additionally , areas of the core where the GISP2 and GRIP chronologies vary will be reexamined .
The goal in the cases where discrepancies exist with the GRIP record is not to adjust the GISP2 chronology , but to identify any errors that are now evident due to new data and make adjustments as necessary to obtain the best possible GISP2 chronology .
0220769/0220930 Owens/DavisThis collaborative project between Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution and Scripps Institution of Oceanography will demonstrate the feasibility of using an autonomous underwater glider to monitor the structure and strength of western boundary currents .
During the first year of the proposed work the reliability of the glider will be demonstrated in a less severe environment .
During the ensuing years , the complexity and duration of the glider missions will be increased as we begin deploying them to make transects between the New England continental shelf and Bermuda .
The choice of the Gulf Stream as the initial boundary current to be investigated was made for obvious logistical reasons .
The gliders will provide cross-sections of velocity , temperature and salinity between the surface and 1000-1500 m depths which will be available in real-time .
These data will be combined to provide approximately monthly estimates of the relative and potential vorticity of the Gulf Stream and its fluxes of heat and salt .
The broader impact of this research will be in providing a new autonomous oceanographic instrument platform and observational techniques that will , first of all , be applicable to all other western boundary current including those believed to be crucial for predicting climate variability .
Beyond that this instrument will find application in coastal zone monitoring for pollution and living resources , for military surveillance and as a general tool for oceanographic observation .
The proposed WSSU Computer Science and Technology Scholarship Program is going to provide scholarship support to academically talented minority students who demonstrate financial need .
To fulfill the goal of increasing the number of students who enter the high tech workforce or higher education programs , this program provides scholarships to junior and senior level undergraduates , associate degree transfer students pursuing a degree in computer science ; as well as to graduate students pursuing a MS degree in computer science and information technology .
The program is going to attract , enroll , mentor , and enhance the academic performance of CSTSP scholars , thereby increasing the graduation rate of minority and women students in the fields of computer science and information technology .
The program is going to provide 27 scholarships of $ 3,125 per year per student during the first year , and 27 scholarships per year during years two to four .
Three primary objectives of the program are to 1 ) increase the number of minority and women who enroll in computer science ; 2 ) increase the number of minority and women who graduate with a BS or MS in computer science and/or computer science and information technology ; 3 ) increase the pool of students who are prepared to enter the computer technology workforce or pursue high education in the field .
Additional benefits of the program include 1 ) enhancement of the undergraduate computer science curriculum ; 2 ) increased collaboration with business and industry ; 3 ) development of collaborations with the growing body of bio-medical and high tech industries in the city of Winston-Salem , North Carolina , as well as state and national employers ; 4 ) strengthen collaborations with the departments of mathematics , life sciences , physical sciences , and health sciences ; 5 ) enhance the professional development of faculty resulting from mentoring scholars engaged in research .
ourier analysis appears in many of the celebrated cornerstones oftheoretical computer science .
It plays essential roles in expandergraph construction and derandomization , complexity lower bounds , probabilistically checkable proof systems , quantum computing , lowerbounds for distributed computation , and traditional applications tocomputer algebra .
The majority of these applications involve thefamiliar framework of commutative Fourier analysis .
The proposedproject brings together a multidisciplinary research team to apply thebeautiful tools of non-Abelian ( that is , noncommutative ) Fourieranalysis to investigate open questions in two areas where non-Abeliangroups have recently become very important lower bounds for parallelcomputation and quantum algorithms .
The program also further developsefficient algorithms for the discrete Fourier transform over finitenon-Abelian groups.This project focuses on developing tools for separating the complexityclasses ACC^0 and NC^1 , in order to demonstrate that there are natural ( polynomial-time computable ) problems which simply can not beparallelized in the sense of ACC^0 .
The project applies a new familyof tools for separating such circuit classes , using non-AbelianFourier analysis to bound their computational power .
These tools applyalso to the problem of solving equations over finite groups , and thedevelopment of new probabilistically checkable proof systems based onnon-Abelian groups .
In addition , the project applies non-AbelianFourier analysis to develop improved lower bounds on the standardQuantum Fourier Transform approach to Graph Isomorphism and studyquantum Monte Carlo algorithms .
Finally , the project focuses onadaptations of Bratelli diagrams and quivers to develop classical andquantum algorithms for the non-Abelian Fourier transform itself .
Jackie SmithFletcher WinstonSUNY at Stony BrookThis Doctoral Dissertation Improvement project examines the tactics of two environmental social movement organizations-one that uses moderate tactics , and the other more radical modes of action .
The goal is to understand these different approaches to collective action , and how relationships with government , businesses , and other nonprofit association might impact tactical decisions .
The study has two components-participant observation of two environmental groups on Long Island , one using moderate and the other radical tactics .
This will allow the PI to study how processes of interaction influence tactical choice .
The second part of the project includes a mail survey of a representative sample of environmental groups to gather data on the types of relationships they hold .
Findings from the project could potentially contribute to our knowledge of how social movement groups come to select tactics and the effect of relational ties on group mobilization .
Curved geometry plays an important role in many applications , including manufacturing , robotics , and graphics .
In many cases , highly accurate and robust operations and representations are desired , but the perceived implementation difficulties and inefficiencies ( e.g .
from exact computation ) prevent application .
Compared to the linear and combinatorial problems traditionally associated with computational geometry , problems involving curved solids are far more complicated .
In practical terms , problems with accuracy , efficiency , and robustness are all significantly worse when dealing with curved geometry , and significant work remains in addressing these three areas .
With further development , efficient implementations , and demonstrated applications , however , accurate and robust operations will find greater acceptance , giving a potential benefit to several application areas .
This proposal outlines a plan of research that addresses accuracy , efficiency , and robustness of operations on curved geometry .
Overall , it is a topic that is both challenging and promising in terms of potential impact and future research opportunities .
The proposed research addresses fundamental areas needed for further development of precise operations with curved solids .
Theoretical issues are addressed , but a primary focus of the proposed research is on implementation .
Most of the areas of proposed research are geared toward finding highly accurate or exact implementations that still achieve reasonable efficiency .
Software will be released to support dissemination of the results .
Specific areas of research include- Filtered Sequences of Computations- Incorporating Root-Finding into Expression Trees- Filtered Geometric Representations- Resultant Computations- Evaluating Combinations of Efficiency Improvements- Handling Degeneracies- Computing with Transcendental Functions- Exact Geometric RepresentationsApplication will be a major goal for all of the research areas .
Application will serve both to drive new research ideas , and to allow testing and evaluation of research results .
The primary application that will be used is solid modeling , from a traditional CAD perspective .
The need for accurate and efficient representations in solid modeling is well recognized , making this research particularly relevant .
In addition , solid modeling applications present a wide range of problems of varying complexity that allow thorough evaluation of the new methods .
Besides solid modeling , we will also investigate application to geometric modeling of other objects , such as neurons , plants , and other naturally occurring objects .
Application to neuron modeling will be in conjunction with an ongoing project on mapping brain microstructure , an exciting new interdisciplinary problem area with enormous potential that Texas A & M is in a unique position to address.The proposed research will be integrated into educational activities .
A new course in practical computer algebra will be developed that supports the research areas .
Undergraduate student research will be encouraged through direct involvement in projects , coursework , and interaction through service activities .
The University of California at Berkeley together with CUREE ( the Consortium of Universities for Research in Earthquake Engineering ) have planned a symposium in honor of Emeritus Professors Ray Clough and Joseph Penzien to be held on the Berkeley campus on May 9-11 , 2002 .
The event recognizes the notable contributions made by two of the most influential researchers and educators in structural and earthquake engineering .
The wide-ranging careers of Professors Ray Clough and Joseph Penzien at UC Berkeley included teaching , research and consulting on topics such as the finite element method ; shake table testing ; seismic analysis and design of dams , bridges , water tanks , offshore structures , power plants , and buildings ; analysis of strong ground motion records ; and development of seismic design criteria.The Symposium features a technical program having broad appeal for practicing engineers , researchers , teachers and students .
The program combines historical perspectives of structural and earthquake engineering with state-of-the-art discussions on topics represented by the seminal works of the honorees .
Attention is given to emerging technologies , including those related to the Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation ( NEES ) and to protective devices and sensors.The program is particularly valuable to junior faculty starting careers in structural and earthquake engineering , as it provides them an opportunity to have a four-decade perspective of the field as well as an appreciation of the contributions of the two noted pioneers .
They also have an opportunity to hear about emerging technologies and the future directions in the fields of structural and earthquake engineering .
The opportunity to mingle with the giants of the field in an inviting technical environment is one that will make a lasting impression on the junior faculty in particular .
Automatic Analysis of Spontaneous Facial ExpressionsAbstractThe goal of this project is to develop computer systems for automatic analysis of spontaneous facial expressions , with a focus on the scientific study of the role of facial expressions in deception .
A state-of-the-art digital video database of spontaneous facial expressions will be developed .
This database will be hand-coded by behavioral scientist experts on facial expressions .
This database will be used to develop an array of software tools for automatic analysis of facial expressions from video sequences .
These tools will be developed by machine perception scientists in close collaboration with behavioral scientists and will be evaluated and refined for application to the scientific study of facial expressions.The machine perception community is in critical need for standard video databases to train and evaluate systems for automatic recognition of facial expressions .
This project will provide one such database and thus could potentially accelerate research in this field .
Automated recognition systems would have a tremendous impact on basic research by making facial expression measurement more accessible as a behavioral measure , providing data on the dynamics of facial behavior at resolutions that was previously unavailable .
Such systems would also lay the foundations for computers that can understand this critical aspect of human communication .
The objective of the program is to develop a student support and scholarship program that builds on established relationships with local industry and with alumni .
Students selected for the program based on financial need and academic potential receive annual grants of $ 3125 , for up to three years , as encouragement to complete a degree in computer science or mathematics .
These grants are used to reduce the loan and employment portions of the students ' financial aid packages , rather than to replace grants from other sources .
Thus , they provide substantial economic incentive to the students .
Each of the four years of the program , 31 students majoring in computer science or mathematics are selected .
Individual students are eligible beginning in their second year , and receive funding for up to three years , provided they continue to meet the eligibility criteria .
In addition to meeting financial need and nationality criteria , the student must demonstrate the potential for academic success.Students in the program receive individual guidance from faculty and student support professionals , including the College 's full-service Career Center .
However , the most noteworthy aspects of the student support are those that connect outside of the College .
Each year , students in the program are taken on trips to visit at least two companies in the region and talk with alumni there .
Additionally , alumni employed at a wider sampling of employers participate in an annual round table discussion held at Gustavus .
Last , but not least , alumni volunteers stay in touch with a few students each , in order to provide individualized mentoring .
Frequent contacts with local industry , and in particular with alumni , provide the reminder that an exciting career awaits those who are well prepared .
The University of Texas at Austin is partnering with the Hispanic Scholarship Fund Institute to produce outstanding undergraduates for service and research in the public sector as part of a unique academic experience for computer science , mathematics and engineering majors .
A total of 32 four-year scholarships are being awarded to talented students who are entering the University as Longhorn Scholars with an interest in technology fields .
The highly successful Longhorn Scholars Program , now in its third year of operation , identifies financially needy students who graduate in the top 10 % of their class from 70 historically underrepresented high schools in the State of Texas .
The Colleges of Engineering and Natural Sciences participates by providing a rigorous curriculum and associated degrees in the targeted areas .
Recognizing the substantial population of minority students graduating from these high schools , the Hispanic Scholarship Foundation has offered to assist in devising a collection of retention strategies including mentoring programs and placement opportunities in public sector research laboratories , research internships and cooperatives .
Despite its large size , the University of Texas is committed to a personalized academic experience for its students .
In particular , Longhorn Scholars are evaluated to identify career interests as well as academic strengths and weaknesses .
This information is used to determine the appropriate academic track for each student .
Depending on major and background , students become part of either the Equal Opportunity in Engineering Program ( EOE ) , the Partnership for Excellence in the Natural Sciences program ( PENS ) or the Emerging Scholars Program ( ESP ) that serves both Colleges .
Each of these programs provides an intricate support structure that includes strong faculty participation , personalized academic advising and mentoring and an intensive math and science curriculum .
The Hispanic Scholarship Fund Institute is augmenting these existing services with external mentoring programs as well as seminars and field experiences to introduce students to the function and significance of the public sector in technology advancement .
By their junior and senior years , students will be poised to begin capstone experiences through academic research , internships and co-ops .
It is expected that many will participate in the public sector opportunities made available as a part of this initiative .
The CSEMS scholarships and the support programs surrounding them contribute directly to the primary mission of The University of Texas at Austin to effectively serve all populations of the State of Texas in producing outstanding graduates .
The ability to bring together such a wide array of collaborators speaks to the importance of this mission in producing a new generation of leaders in technology fields .
The Departments of Computer Science , Engineering , and Mathematics , in collaboration with the Office of Strategic Initiatives and the Center for Academic Success at Louisiana State University , is increasing the educational and career opportunities for academically talented , financially disadvantaged students to reach their fullest potential through a student/faculty partnership with a comprehensive monitoring system .
The goal of this project is to recruit financially disadvantaged students , to retain these students , and to enhance the educational experience of these students in the technology disciplines .
Specific objectives are ( 1 ) Recruit qualified students through an active K-12 educational outreach program , including math and science fairs , competitions , and in-school math and science laboratories , ( 2 ) Retain these students through the incorporation of student support and mentoring programs , ( 3 ) Enhance the educational experience of these students through workshops/seminars , industrial outreach , and community service opportunities , ( 4 ) Increase the number of undergraduates , including women and minorities in the above-mentioned disciplines , and ( 5 ) Promote intercultural participation among non-minority and minority students .
In addition to the scholarships , the project consists of three activities ( 1 ) mandatory computer and information technology training ( average 2 hrs/wk ) , ( 2 ) mandatory academic enhancement activities ( average 1 hr/wk ) , and ( 3 ) optional educational and industrial outreach programs ( up to 3 hrs/wk ) .
CSEMS Scholars receive additional information technology training through various workshops and training courses .
The Office of Strategic Initiatives and the Center for Academic Success , Co-PIs , and several other faculty members provide active mentoring and academic assistance for the CSEMS Scholars to maximize their chances for academic success .
The faculty mentors also assist CSEMS Scholars in pursuing their professional careers though continuing graduate studies or job placement in industries relevant to their education .
There are 29 students per year majoring in computer science , engineering , or mathematics disciplines who hold scholarships .
Scholarships can be renewed up to graduation .
CSEMS Scholars form a community that interacts regularly with each other , with faculty , and with other students on campus .
Lefer0220763In the past few years there has been an explosion of scientific interest in the chemical processing occurring in sunlit snow .
Rather than simply acting as a passive sink for the products of tropospheric reactions , the snowpack has been shown to be one of the most photochemically active , and strongly oxidizing , regions of the entire troposphere .
The group of investigators assembled for this proposal has played a central role in this revolution in our thinking about the role of the snowpack in atmospheric chemistry .
One key finding has been that photolysis of snow chromophores initiates the release of a number of important trace gases .
Initial modeling suggests that photolysis of a number of these gases ( HCHO , HOOH , CH3CHO and HONO ) results in an enormous production of HOx ( i.e. , OH and HO2 ) , which in turn causes a large enhancement of these radicals in the snowpack and in the air just above the snow .
Because oxidation by OH is the main sink for many tropospheric gases , including some of those important for climate change and stratospheric O3 depletion , this enhancement in HOx might significantly perturb tropospheric chemistry .
Snowpack chemistry likely also modifies the chemical records of atmospheric composition ultimately preserved in glacial ice .
While recent work has shown that photochemical and physical processes in the snowpack can impact the chemistry and composition of both the atmosphere and snowpack , these processes are , in general , poorly understood .
This is especially true for the processes that produce and consume OH and HO2 .
The research will elucidate the processes that produce and consume OH and HO2 radicals within and above sunlit snow over a wide range of environmental conditions , thereby improving our understanding of fast photochemistry within this unique environment .
Summary This proposal requests support to collect a series of high accumulation rate cores from the Indonesian region .
Analyses of the cores will be used to document the nature of centennial-millennial variability in the Western Pacific Warm Pool and Indonesian throughflow .
The field program will obtain a series of cores in depth transects beginning at about 200m water depth along the main route of the Indonesian throughflow including the Makassar Strait , Sulawesi Sea and Timor channels .
The post cruise analytical program will focus on establishing a basic stratigraphic framework for selected cores using planktic foraminifer oxygen isotope measurements and AMS 14C dating .
In addition surface sediment samples will be used for an initial temperature calibration study on shallow water benthic foraminifer Mg/Ca .
0220839ChangThis Pan American Advanced Studies Institute ( PASI ) award on Materials for Energy Conversion and Environmental Protection , jointly supported by the National Science Foundation ( NSF ) and the Department of Energy ( DOE ) , is being organized by Dr. R. P. H. Chang of Northwestern University in collaboration withDr .
Guillermo Solorzano of the Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro .
The proposed PASI will take place in Rio de Janeiro , Brazil during the first week of September 2003 .
Experts in fields of energy conservation , energy storage and environmental remediation will present lectures and engage students in discussion sessions .
Lecturers will discuss new materials and processes for fuel cell design and applications , new catalytic materials for hydrogen gas generation , and the use of carbon and metallic materials for hydrogen storage .
Another part of the PASI will be devoted to the study of environmental protection and emissions reduction for a range of pollutants .
Students participating in this PASI will develop a collaborative research plan and gain an understanding of the latest research related to energy conservation .
The ARM processor , a leading processor design for the embedded domain , supports a 32 bit ARM instruc-tion set as well as a 16 bit Thumb instruction set .
This project is aimed at exploring two approaches for generating code that will simultaneously achieve the goals of small code size , low energy consumption , and good performance .
The frst approach judiciously combines the use of ARM and Thumb instructions to generate mixed code either dynamically or at compile time .
The second approach focusses on changing the data layout in a way that compact code can be generated without sacrifcing good performance .
To thoroughly explore the above approaches an experimental infrastructure based upon the Simplescalar simulator and the gcc compiler is being developed .
Perhaps one of the most important changes that occured in the history of humankind was the shift from hunting and gathering to farming .
With agriculture populations dramatically expanded and cities , states and empires emerged .
Over the millennia this pattern repeatedly occurred around the world .
However , this sequence is not invariably the case .
Learning how and why farming began , spread , and why many cultures began to farm , but others did not , remains one of archaeology and anthropology 's major research priorities.Scientists worked for decades in southern Mexico to learn when , where , and how some of the world 's most important crops , including maize , beans , and squash were domesticated .
In the American Southwest archaeologists have long known that these crops diffused northward to become the economic mainstay of hundreds of Southwestern Native American cultures .
However , archaeologists have almost no information about the spread of crops across the intervening hundreds of thousands of square miles .
This project seeks to begin to fill this void by searching for archaeological sites that contain remains of these ancient crops that can begin to tell the story of how agriculture spread from Mexico to the Southwest , a topic of active debate but with little solid data .
Archaeologists have argued that about 3000 years ago , either the crops spread northward with migrating Mexican Indians , or was passed along between successive groups of hunter-gatherers across northern Mexico .
With NSF support , a team of five experienced scholars will search southwestern Chihuahua , about 300 miles south of the border for locations that may yield significant answers concerning these questions .
This project is suitable for NSF 's High Risk Projects in Anthropology program as the goal is to discover previously unknown sites of the appropriate age that contain maize .
Yet they must search in the vast expanses of verdant river valleys , deep canyons and the uplands of southwest Chihuahua .
All are potential routes for the spread of agriculture but have received little archaeological attention .
The major river valleys of western Chihuahua are likely places to search as team members Robert Hard , John Roney , Karen Adams , and Art MacWilliams have been involved in excavating , with previous NSF support , the dramatic remains of large , 3000 year old , farming settlements built on hilltops above a major floodplain in the northwest corner of Chihuahua , only about 30 miles south of the border .
Team member Art MacWilliams and colleagues have also previously found evidence that adjacent regions in central Chihuahua were occupied 4000 to 3000 years ago .
Innumerable dry caves , ideal locations for preserved plant remains , in the Sierra Madre Occidental , current home of the Tarahumara Indians , of western Chihuahua may also contain key evidence of early agriculture .
This mountain range , which extends from Mesoamerica north to the international border , is another previously suggested route for the advancement of agriculture .
Project ethnobotanist Karen Adams , will work with plant remains recovered from these caves .
The Tarahumara Indians , long studied by project member William Merrill , continue to practice corn farming in small , dispersed fields , using techniques and knowledge that may have extraordinary time-depth .
We expect to obtain new information about strategies of subsistence farming in southwest Chihuahua .
This NSF-supported project will provide new information about how and when agriculture spread from Mexico to the Southwest and contribute to the global questions of how farming spread around the world .
0220458BehringerThe primary goal of this project is to understand the genetic differences that underlie morphological variation between mammalian species .
Dr. Behringer hypothesizes that many of these genetic differences reside in DNA sequences that regulate the transcription of developmental control genes .
He has chosen to focus upon the classic developmental biology paradigm of vertebrate limb development .
He proposes to make functional comparisons between mouse and bat limb morphogenesis because compared to mouse , bats have highly modified limbs .
The developmental control gene that he proposes to study , Prx1 , encodes a paired homeodomain transcription factor that is required in mice for limb and craniofacial development .
He has localized a discreet < 600 bp DNA segment encoding a transcriptional enhancer that directs limb expression in a Prx1-specific pattern during mouse development .
He has isolated the Prx1 orthologue from bat ( Carollia perspicillata ) libraries that we have generated .
He is characterizing the expression pattern of this gene in bat embryos by whole-mount and section RNA in situ hybridization .
He has identified the putative limb enhancer of the bat Prx1 gene by virtue of its conserved DNA sequence and genomic position relative to mouse and human orthologues .
He will test the activity of this putative limb enhancer using a lacZ reporter assay in transgenic mice .
He will then replace the endogenous limb enhancer of the mouse Prx1 gene with the bat Prx1 limb enhancer by gene targeting in mouse embryonic stem ( ES ) cells .
Thus , mice will be generated where the mouse Prx1 gene is expressed under the control of the bat Prx1 limb enhancer .
He will assess the morphological consequences of this regulatory element alteration in the limbs .
He proposes that this type of highly focused in vivo test will provide important insights into the genetic basis of morphological divergence .
In addition , his studies should further our understanding of how regulatory diversity can modulate organogenesis .
AbstractThis project at LaSalle University awards a total of thirty ( 30 ) scholarships to low income , academically talented students , including twenty ( 20 ) undergraduate students and ten ( 10 ) graduate students over a 4-year period.The target audience includes 30 % women , and 10 % minorities .
A special effort is made to recruit additional women , particularly into the undergraduate Computer Science and Information Technology majors .
The PI works with designated staff in the Admissions Office to increase the number of minority students majoring in MTH/CSC/IT by seeking transfer students from Community College of Philadelphia and from LaSalle 's Bilingual Undergraduate Studies for Career Advancement Program , an innovative associate degree program for Latino students.In addition to scholarship assistance for the student recipients , NSF funds are also used for project management and for a special Career Exploration series of guest speakers who are employed in these fields .
The University provides funds from its annual budget to the Mathematics and Computer Science Department for tutorial assistance for the undergraduate CSEMS recipients.80 % of the funded students are expected to receive their degrees within four years of matriculating at La Salle , and 80 % are expected to attain new or advanced professional positions related to their field of study within one year of graduation .
AbstractATM-0220842Marshall , Thomas C.University of MississippiTitle Studies of the Evolution of Thunderstorm Electricity and LightningThis project continues the analysis of data collected in the summer of 1999 at Langmuir Laboratory of New Mexico Tech as part of the SEET project ( Study of Electrical Evolution of Thunderstorms ) .
The data consist of thunderstorm observations by two research radars , a surface network of electric-field measurements , the precise locations and times of lightning flashes measured by the Lightning Mapping Array , and balloon-soundings of the electric field in the storms .
The objective is to synthesize the data to produce a coherent picture of thunderstorm electrical evolution .
The locations of the main charge regions are inferred from the balloon soundings of the electric field .
The locations and magnitudes of the charges measured in sequential soundings are then compared to study the electrical evolution of the cloud .
The locations of the charged regions are also compared with the lightning paths and the radar-observed precipitation patterns to learn how these quantities are related .
The work advances the understanding of charge generation and lightning production by thunderstorms , explores the relations between the radar structure of storms and the lightning they produce , and lays groundwork for better predictions of the electrical hazards that accompany thunderstorms .
The plurality of science in China is a large unexplored topic in the world history of science .
Rather than a single narrative of traditional science , the issue calls for a new framework that acknowledges that many modes for understanding nature coexisted in pre-modern China .
Most of these survived modernization and nation-building in the early twentieth century .
This dissertation research project will examine the plurality of science in China , analyzing the relationship between science and popular culture from the seventeenth through the early twentieth centuries .
The approach of this doctoral dissertation subordinates the investigation of elite intellectual traditions that has so far dominated the historiography of Chinese science .
Historians such as Margaret Jacob and Larry Stewart have examined the transformation of European culture through the popularization of science in the eighteenth century ; it is time to study Chinese counterparts .
This study will add new perspectives to themes familiar to historians of western science such as the professionalization of scientists and the relationship between science and the nation-state , avoiding the one-dimensional approach .
The relationship between science and popular culture offers a key framework not only for understanding the plurality of science in traditional China , but for showing in what ways its evolution differed from that of the European technical enterprise .
That will make it possible to avoid conventionally exaggerating the very limited impact of small groups of reformist scientists and traditional doctors on Chinese culture .
Popular understandings of nature , intermixed with elite intellectual traditions , pervaded every aspect of Chinese society from the imperial court to the peasant village .
Despite the great diversity of customs and language within China , everyone shared an understanding of gods , ghosts , and spirits as intermediaries between man and the cosmos .
The spiritual world affected the practice of science and medicine and , through state sacrifices and local rituals , organized craft production .
The natural world served as a stage for social interactions that created and applied modes for rational understanding .
This study will examine the diversity and flexibility of these human relations , and their underlying conceptions of the natural world , in the areas of craft production and healing .
Studies so far indicate that attention to scholarly discourse , local and supra-local community relations , and state appropriation or suppression of popular religious practices will cast light on science , technology , and medicine as Chinese actually practiced them .
This proposal requests $ 12,000 to be used over twelve months for travel to the archives in China and Taiwan .
This program provides scholarships to talented , low-income students pursuing careers or transfer associate degrees in computer science , computer information systems , engineering , or mathematics .
Special consideration for scholarships is given to women , ethnic and racial minorities and persons with disabilities .
Students in the program receive individualized support , peer mentoring , and opportunities for field trips and internships with local employers .
The scholarship recipients are required to take 2-credit Special Topics course in Engineering , Mathematic , and Computer Technology , which encourages group discussion and interaction , and focuses on problem solving activities .
The College has well-established transfer agreements with 4-year colleges throughout Washington and graduates have many opportunities for high-paying employment with local industries .
Strong collaboration with the local business and industry is a critical component of this program .
With the growing use of the Internet technology , unintentional faults and intentional intrusions directly on network protocols , such as routing protocols ( e.g. , BGP , OSPF ) , have become a serious threat to our Internet-connected society .
Over the past few years , the researchers have seenmany fault or security related instances happening to our Internet and , because of these problems , significant losses occurred one way or the other .
In the research communities , such as fault tolerantnetworking , network security , and intrusion detection , many new ideas have been explored to enhance the existing network protocols or , more drastically , to propose a completely new Internet architecture .
Some vulnerabilities have been reduced or removed , but yet the researchers expect many more new vulnerabilities and problems to be discovered.The researchers believe that , to effectively monitor and control a large system , they need not only a well-designed and implemented system but also , equally important , a good human interface to know the system after it is deployed and operated .
The researchers also believe that , in the foreseeablefuture , human intelligence will play a critical role in managing and maintaining large distributed systems such as the Internet .
But , surprisingly few research efforts are currently toward this direction.The main contribution in this project is a human-interactive approach to handle faults and security attacks on the Internet routing protocols such as BGP ( Border Gateway Protocol ) and OSPF ( OpenShortest Path First ) .
We will investigate several critical but very difficult ( difficult in the sense if we would rely completely on machine intelligence ) issues and offer solutions based on an interactive visual-based analysis process .
For example , anomaly detection systems for unknown/novel attacks are hard to build due to the consideration of effectiveness , coverage , and false positive .
Also , network event correlation is very difficult because this task normally involves very complicated potential relations among various events on the Internet and the amount of resources to complete the task is prohibitively expensive.This research addresses two very fundamental problems .
One is the formulation of typical visual-based anomaly detection processes .
The other is the mapping of not only the protocol data but also the analysis process to appropriate visualization representations and associated operations .
The resulting visual-based process would allow a human network operator quickly navigate to the right level of details to discover critical facts about the Internet .
For the networkrouting protocol management , we study the optimal boundary between the machine intelligence and the human intelligence on detecting and tracking anomaly that was previously impossible to understand .
ABSTRACTOCE-0220215 / OCE-0221161 / OCE-0217164In this project researchers at East Carolina University , Tulane University , and the University of Miami will attempt to a comprehensive approach to allow a quantitative estimate of groundwater discharge and associated dissolved constituents to continental shelf waters .
A number of recent studies have shown that he transport of groundwater into coastal zones may be a significant process in the geochemical , nutrient , and carbon budgets of many marine nearshore waters .
This project will address the manner in which we may evaluate interactions between groundwater and surface water a major river-dominated margin , the Mississippi River delta.The research team will develop and apply a novel multiple-tracer approach involving the use of 222Rn/ 226Ra , 4He/3He/tritium , and short-lived radium isotopes as natural tracers of groundwater flow to examine the margin adjacent to the Mississippi River .
Water samples will be collected from land-based groundwater wells near the Louisiana coast , deep porewaters via Kasten core , and surface waters from the lower Mississippi and adjacent continental shelf throughout the project .
To evaluate the connection between groundwater inputs and surface water tracer inventories , we team will construct a balance of all possible inputs and outputs of these natural tracers..
This field-based research will be used to develop and constrain a numerical hydrologic model for the study area .
Model results will be compared to estimates of groundwater flow obtained from geochemical modeling .
Automatic Analysis of Spontaneous Facial ExpressionsAbstractThe goal of this project is to develop computer systems for automatic analysis of spontaneous facial expressions , with a focus on the scientific study of the role of facial expressions in deception .
A state-of-the-art digital video database of spontaneous facial expressions will be developed .
This database will be hand-coded by behavioral scientist experts on facial expressions .
This database will be used to develop an array of software tools for automatic analysis of facial expressions from video sequences .
These tools will be developed by machine perception scientists in close collaboration with behavioral scientists and will be evaluated and refined for application to the scientific study of facial expressions.The machine perception community is in critical need for standard video databases to train and evaluate systems for automatic recognition of facial expressions .
This project will provide one such database and thus could potentially accelerate research in this field .
Automated recognition systems would have a tremendous impact on basic research by making facial expression measurement more accessible as a behavioral measure , providing data on the dynamics of facial behavior at resolutions that was previously unavailable .
Such systems would also lay the foundations for computers that can understand this critical aspect of human communication .
Linn-Benton Community College 's ( LBCC ) project expands opportunities for education , increases retention to baccalaureate degree achievement , and improves employability of low-income , academically talented students in transfer programs in Computer Science , Engineering , and Mathematics.This is accomplished by providing targeted academic , career , and other support services to therecipients of 30 scholarship awards each year.The four main components of the LBCC Tech Scholars Program ( TSP ) areoFinancial support through TSP scholarships to allow talented low-income students to pursue full-time studies in Computer Science , Engineering , and MathematicsoAcademic support through existing programs and new initiatives to assist students with current coursework and prepare them for success in upper division courseworkoMentoring and student support to increase retention at LBCC and to promote a smooth transition to the transfer institutionoActivities to strengthen employability , including career explorations , preparation for internships , and development of job-seeking skillsThe theme permeating all components of this project is 'community building ' a focus on establishing acohort that provides peer support ; develops an increased sense of belonging ; and promotes identificationwith the discipline at LBCC , the target transfer institution , and the chosen profession .
Enhancements toexisting support services as well as new initiatives are designed specifically to strengthen these bonds andreduce feelings of isolation .
There is a great need in Oregon for skilled high tech employees .
LBCC is in a prime position to work toward meeting that need because of high unemployment in parts of our service district , a large percentage of students who have financial need , strong community support for this community college , robust transfer programs in Computer Science , Engineering , and Mathematics , and extensive articulation with both high schools and transfer institutions.LBCC initially recruits low-income students who are currently enrolled at the college and whohave demonstrated academic talent in Computer Science , Engineering , or Mathematics into the TSP.After the first year , the program expands to include low-income high school students who havedemonstrated academic talent and expressed an interest in majoring in one of these three areas .
Thefinancial support provided by the scholarships increases full-time enrollment and improve academiclife by reducing the need to work long hours for an income .
TSP scholars are then able to more fullyutilize the academic , career , and personal support services .
TSP scholars benefit from extensive academic support systems currently available , including free tutoring ; Supplemental Instruction ; and a Learning Center with Math , Science , Writing , Reading , and Study Skills assistance .
Enhancements and additions included as part of the project include the establishment of a Tech Scholar Center ( a designated room on campus where TSP scholars can hang out , work on their studies together , and get academic assistance ) ; expanded connections between TSP scholars and faculty , students , and organizations at transfer institutions ; site visits and presentations by industry representatives ; development of job-seeking skills ; and increased participation in career-enhancing activities such as internships .
This project awards 25 scholarships annually to students enrolled on a full time basis in Engineering Technology , Mathematics , or Computer Sciences .
The primary objectives are to increase the number of students pursuing and obtaining degrees , improve the performance of enrolled students , and increase the marketable skills of the students in Mathematics , Computer Sciences , and Engineering Technology.Mentoring , advising , counseling , career placement , internships , and research opportunities are integrated through teams that meet regularly focusing specifically on the scholars .
Within the project is an assessment plan that is designed to foster continuous improvement .
This project investigates new architectures for domains such as cryptography , signal processing , and error correction , where the applications are highly parallel .
Traditional microprocessor architectures will not efficiently scale to exploit the parallelism present in these applications .
Hardware design for these applications is too expensive , risky , and inflexible .
Reconfigurable computing , which attempts to combine programmability with hardware performance , has logistical problems that will prevent its widespread adoption .
This project will develop and evaluate architectures that combine the portability and abstraction of software development with the performance of reconfigurable hardware .
This will be done by converting a serial representation of an application into a spatial representation , and executing the spatial representation on a fabric of locally interconnected processing elements .
The conversion fromserial to spatial representation will be performed at run time , concurrently with execution .
The first phase of this project will involve the definition and prototyping of a first generation of this architecture .
The second phase of the project will refine the code generation techniques forthe architecture .
The third phase of the project will investigate the incorporation of various control-flow operations in the architecture .
0220495WeberDescription This project supports a U.S.-Pakistan Workshop on High Salinity Plants to be held in Karachi , Pakistan in November 2002 .
The organizers are Dr. Darrell Weber , Department of Biology and Range Science , Brigham Young University , Provo , Utah and Dr. M. Ajmal Khan , Department of Biology , University of Karachi , Karachi , Pakistan .
The workshop theme is High salt tolerant plant ecosystems and their use in restoration of highly saline soils and the focus will be on the restoration of highly saline soils .
The subjects include collection and characterization of halophytes for use in restoration of highly saline soils , molecular biology of halophytes and identification of their salt tolerant genes , critical factors involved in the establishment of halophytes on highly saline soils , mechanisms of salt tolerance for halophytes , factors involved in maintaining natural halophyte populations , factors involved in maintaining restored halophyte populations , and development of cash crop halophytes .
The subjects covered focus on the restoration of highly saline soils , the mechanism of salt tolerance would have value in determining what type of plant is selected for restoration .
The workshop is designed to involve a presentation by a U.S. or Pakistan scientist on each specific research area .
Information on how to prepare a joint proposal will be presented .
The proceedings will have information on restoration of highly saline soils , selected areas of high priority research , as well as a literature guide for the cooperative research .
Scope The workshop is being held in conjunction with the 8th national meeting of the Pakistan Botanical Society .
The workshop objectives are consistent with the interests and priorities of the Pakistan Government .
It will include U.S. scientists who are active in the field of plant physiology and ecological studies .
The U.S. participants include four junior scientists .
The results of the workshop will include identifying joint research that would benefit the United States , Pakistan and other countries that have high salinity , especially those that have intensive irrigation systems .
Quantifying the Effects of Swell on the Air-Sea Momentum FluxW .
DrennanRSMASField measurements of momentum fluxes and velocity profiles will be used to help derive a new parameterization of air-sea fluxes under multiple roughness scales .
Near-surface turbulence will be measured from an air-sea interaction spar buoy ( ASIS ) at a marine site in the Baltic Sea .
Directional wave measurements will be made from ASIS and two waverider buoys .
Meteorological measurements will be made from a nearby tower .
This site was chosen to provide a regime of swell aligned with the wind field , a wide-range of atmospheric stability and a low-moderate wind-regime .
The data will be analyzed to derive a better relationship between surface roughness and momentum flux in swell dominated or mixed sea regions .
Incorporation of the new results into state-of-the-are coupled models should lead to improved forecasts of hurricanes and tropical storms .
0219782/0220382 Gordon/SprintallThe Indonesian Throughflow ( ITF ) links two oceans and in so doing provides a pathway for modifying the stratification within each of these oceans as well as sea-air fluxes that impact on such climate phenomena as ENSO and the Asian Monsoon .
While a number of measurement programs have recently been undertaken in the Indonesian region , a serious shortcoming is their lack of temporal coherence the data cover different time periods and depths in the different passages of the complex pathways linking the Pacific and Indian Oceans .
This has lead to ambiguity of the mean and variable nature of the ITF , and of the transformation of the thermohaline and transport profiles within the interior seas .
The INSTANT program , involving contributions of 6 countries ( USA , France , Netherlands , Australia , Indonesia , Japan ) , will finally measure in a coordinated fashion the ITF in the key throughflow passages ( Makassar Strait , Lifamatola Passage , Lombok Strait , Ombai Strait and Timor Passage ) simultaneously .
The measurements span a 3 year period beginning in August 2003 .
The INSTANT objectives are 1 ) To determine the full depth velocity and property structure of the Throughflow and its associated heat and freshwater flux ; 2 ) To resolve the annual , seasonal , and intraseasonal characteristics of the ITF transport and property flux ; 3 ) To investigate the storage and modification of the ITF waters within the internal Indonesian seas , from their Pacific source characteristics to the Indonesian Throughflow water exported into the Indian Ocean ; and 4 ) To contribute to the design of a cost-effective , long-term monitoring strategy for the ITF .
The intellectual merit and broader impact of INSTANT is clear a quantitative view of the ITF will be gained and this will establish the basis for a long term proxy monitoring system , as required to capture the low frequency ITF variability .
The ITF waters are known to play an integral part in the global thermohaline circulation and in the inter-basin transfer of climate signals and their anomalies .
The benefit to the broader oceanographic community will be to finally allow the ITF to be faithfully simulated within ocean and climate models .
In addition , INSTANT will involve education for a graduate student , and will offer research opportunities and training to undergraduates in both Indonesia and the US .
0220079 Lighty The University of Utah ( UofU ) and the Instituto Tecnologico y de Estudios Superiores de Monterrey ( ITESM ) are involved in a collaborative air quality modeling study of ambient particulate matter ( PM ) in selected areas of the Lower Rio Grande Valley ( LRGV ) section of the USA/Mexico border .
Special attention is being given to the peculiar evening episodes with very high PM levels observed near several large border cities and reported to be associated with increased mortality risk in at least one region.The partners have recently participated in a comprehensive PM characterization and source attribution study of the Paso del Norte airshed and propose to use a novel , integrated approach to PM source apportionment by cross-validating the results of PM Receptor Modeling ( using factor analysis of receptor and source characterization data to estimate major source contributions ) with PM Source Modeling results ( using area emission estimates and geography- plus meteorology-based dispersion models to predict evening PM concentrations at specific receptor sites ) .
Successful integration of both methods should permit some degree of interpolation between the limited sampling locations and time points afforded by Receptor Modeling alone while enabling calibration of Source Modeling predictions .
Other potential benefits include improved PM exposure risk assessment opportunities for various population groups and more detailed evaluation of the widely reported statistical association between 24-hr PM averages and urban mortality plus morbidity .
Most of the PM receptor characterization and modeling tasks will be carried out by the Uof U team whereas primary responsibility for the source measurement and modeling tasks will be undertaken by the ITESM team .
Integration of measurement , data fusion , evaluation , and interpretation tasks will require a highly coordinated effort by both teams , an International Collaboration being supported by the NSF-CONACyT Collaborative Research Opportunities Program .
This is a continuation of the current CSEMS scholarship program for 30 mathematics and computer science majors at Augsburg College in Minneapolis , MN .
Our program targets underrepresented groups and non-traditional age students .
The program includes a mentoring seminar to be held one evening per month , internship and career placement at major Twin Cities companies , and the opportunity to work on research projects with faculty members.A selection process has been designed for entry into the program with specific criteria which applicants must satisfy .
Yearly renewal of the scholarship is required of each recipient .
The recruitment plan includes working with the Fond du Lac Tribal and Community College to bring in more Native American students and visits to inner city high schools located near the Augsburg campus.Support structures incorporate and augment existing campus programs .
The program has been designed to be not only a scholarship award but a concerted effort to keep these students from falling through the cracks .
The emphasis is on mentoring from faculty , fellow students , and industry and community representatives with ties to the college .
The Student Pipeline-Computer Science , Mathematics , Engineering and Technology ( SP-CSMET ) Scholarship Program is a student focused , experience-based program .
The SP-CSMET is used to identify incoming freshmen and sophomores that are interested in computer science , engineering , mathematics , and technology .
High school administrators , the university admissions office , the financial aid office and faculty members help identify these students .
The SP-CSMET provides enrichment experiences in engineering , mathematics , and technology by utilizing existing programs and by providing lecture series , workshops , and faculty mentoring for the students .
The SP-CSMET supports 32 new freshmen the first year.The second year of funding supports all freshmen that meet the criteria for their sophomore semester .
The scholarship slots that are open the second year will be used to support new incoming freshmen students .
This process will be repeated the third and fourth year of funding .
The new SP-CSMET Scholarship Program is a feeder ( Student Pipeline ) to a recent NSF-funded Computer Science , Mathematics , Engineering and Technology ( CSMET ) Scholarship Program , serving juniors and seniors .
This project addresses some fundamental aspects of the theory and practice of wireless networking .
An integrated approach , combiningphysical layer innovations with new protocols for medium access control and scheduling , while accounting for application requirements and transport protocol dynamics , is employed for solving the research problems that are identified .
Two major research thrusts are considered .
In the first research thrust , the concept of `` pseudocellular '' wireless networks , which combine the best features of cellular and ad hoc networks , is considered as a paradigm for plug-and-play fourth generation ( 4G ) wireless networks .
Such a flexible architecture is clearly critical for quick set-up of wireless networks in emergency situations , in which stationary , or perhaps even mobile , base stations are deployed at convenient ( but not optimized ) sites to serve both slow-moving and fast-moving users .
However , it is also a key ingredient of our vision of achieving a quantum jump in wireless link speeds , by going beyond the current cellular frequency bands of 1-2 GHz to the large bandwidths available in frequency bands in the 10s of GHz .
The path loss in such bands is high , forcing the use of a dense network of base stations on the one hand , and enabling more aggressive frequency reuse on the other .
The focus of the research is to support a mix of user mobilities , and a mix of real-time and non real-time applications , over a packetized pseudocellular infrastructure .
This setting differs from conventional cellular networks , in that the cell sizes are small , and cells may have substantial overlap .
It differs from wireless Local Area Networks ( WLANs ) , in that it allows for rapidly mobile users despite the small cell sizes .
Instead of a conventional hierarchical structure ( i.e. , large cells for fast-moving users , overlaid on small cells for slow-moving users ) to deal with a range of mobility , a mobile-centric approach , which combines handoffs and reservation-based medium access control , is considered to allow for flexible deployment .
A novel idea to be investigated is the support of priorities on the reservation channel , so as to allow , for example , highly mobile users with real-time calls in progress to rapidly reserve resources when entering a new pseudocell , thus implicitly achieving a handoff .
Another important issue is transceiver optimization of the reservation channel , which requires solution of new problems in multiuser communications.The second research thrust is motivated by the well-known observation that Internet traffic has a heavy-tailed distribution , which typically calls for more conservative resource provisioning than for traditional Markovian traffic models .
Since overprovisioning is unattractive in resource-constrained wireless environment , the approach considered is toemploy a new Quality of Service ( QoS ) framework that allows foraggressive resource utilization , by serving the bulk of thetransactions ( which are short ) rapidly , and penalizing the small fraction of long transactions that contribute to the heavy tails .
Scheduling disciplines that achieve this goal are very different frompopular round robin or fair queueing schedulers , and were considered in the queueing theory literature more than three decades ago .
The implication of these results for heavy-tailed Internettraffic is explored for the first time ( to the best of our knowledge ) in this project .
The scheduling strategy is extended to a shared wireless channel , where fairness is traded off against systemefficiency , with the latter dictating that users seeing the best channels are the ones that should get link access .
The tradeoff is expected to be biased towards efficiency in order to supportheavy-tailed traffic effectively .
The interaction between scheduling and the dynamics of TCP connections ( TCP is the Internet data transport protocol on top of which most transactions run ) is explored , keeping in mind that a TCP connection that is starved of network resources can get locked out of the network due to repeated timeouts and rate cutbacks .
Finally , the dependence of scheduling on mobility is explored , with the concept of assigning priority to highly mobileusers ( who have a smaller chance of getting access to the link during their sojourn in a given pseudocell ) , while keeping overall QoS and fairness in mind .
The scheduling methods we develop place a high importance on overall system efficiency , and are therefore well-suited to flat rate pricing , which is arguably an effective mechanism of promoting usage growth in wireless data networks .
Proposal # 0220601PI Judith L. GerstingInstitution University of Hawaii at HiloTitle ALOHA - A Learning Opportunity for High AchieversThis CSEMS program provides support for a cohort of 15 students for 4 years to complete the Bachelor of Science degree in Computer Science .
Three target population groups have been identified , with the intent to secure , as much as possible , an equitable representation of students from each group traditional high school graduates , community college transfer students , and students from U.S.-affiliated Pacific Islands , including U.S. territories of American Samoa and Guam , the Republic of the Marshall Islands , the Federated States of Micronesia ( FSM ) , the Commonwealth of the Northern Marianas Islands ( CNMI ) , and the Republic of Palau ( Belau ) .Students are selected based not only on academic ability and financial need , but also on their understanding of the rigors of the degree requirements .
Student support services for the first two years include both academic and social support structures in an attempt to improve retention .
These services concentrate on mentoring and providing supplemental instruction .
The following two years include an emphasis on skills and opportunities to transition to a high technology workforce , and exposure to career opportunities .
The program builds on existing strengths such as the quality of the computer science degree program , a caring faculty , a high sense of identity among computer science majors , and support services and activities designed to broaden the path to graduation for students .
Consistent with the program guidelines , academically talented but financially disadvantaged students are identified , challenged , supported , and guided through completion of the degree and on into the workforce .
0220352ElnaggarDescription This award is to support a collaborative project between Dr. Mohammed I. El-Naggar , Department of Electrical Engineering , Ohio State University , Columbus , Ohio and Dr. Hamed El-Simary , Electronics Research Institute , Cairo , Egypt .
The two investigators will focus their research on the microelectromechanical systems ( MEMS ) and their interface circuit .
They aim to integrate passive components permitted by MEMS technology to implement an integrated RF system on a chip , including the integration of sensors and the electronics circuits on the same chip .
The deliverables from the various work-packages of this project will have an application in the area of RF circuits , which is important for industrial purposes .
Scope MEMS technology permits the fabrication of complex mechanical shapes on a micron scale , and it allows production of capacitive sensors , high-Q ( Quality factor ) resonant structures for oscillators , mixers , and filters .
It also allows fabrication of variable capacitors and suspended inductor for high frequency tuned oscillators .
The US PI has the facilities and expertise to develop such devices .
The project will involve design activities by the Egyptian team and fabrication and testing by the U.S. team .
It will facilitate transfer of technical know-how to Egypt and also intellectual transfer to the U.S .
The two teams have already done some work in this area .
Participation by industry is expected in assessing the degree of improvement of components .
The project will involve one U.S. graduate student and exchanges of visits by the Egyptian and the U.S. investigators .
This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program , which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative activities .
Evaporation is a key link between the surface energy , carbon and water balances of Arctic tundra ecosystems .
Because of the sensitivity of Arctic ecosystems to future change , understanding the links between changes in the surface energy , carbon and water balances are important for predicting the impacts of climate change on the global water , energy and carbon cycles .
Given that the evaporation process is acutely non-linear , using time and space averaged inputs in evaporation models may potentially lead to significant errors .
It is hypothesized that heterogeneity associated with permafrost dynamics , soil moisture , vegetation ( vascular/non-vascular ) and the occurrence of free water bodies ( lakes ) leads to large uncertainties in model estimates of evaporation where time and area averaged inputs are used .
This doctoral dissertation research project will investigate the significance of sub-grid spatial and temporal heterogeneity on modeled evaporation estimates at scales ranging from landscape ( 1 km2 ) to regions ( 100 km2 ) in Arctic Coastal Plain ecosystems .
The significance of these effects will be examined within the framework of the BIOME-BGC model adapted to Arctic ecosystems .
BIOME-BGC is a widely used ecophysiological process model designed to compute water , carbon and nutrient fluxes at a variety of scales .
Data for model inputs , calibration , and validation will be derived from a combination of eddy flux tower , eddy flux aircraft , field , and satellite remotely sensed data .
A field based , high resolution , geographic information system map will be developed at each eddy flux tower locations for improving representations of vegetation and soil moisture in model estimates of evaporative fluxes .
While improving our understandings of the controls over the evaporation process in Arctic coastal plain ecosystems , this research provides the foundation for adapting a regional model of the energy , carbon , and water cycles to Arctic ecosystems .
Arctic ecosystems are of particular importance to global climate change studies due to their sensitivity to temperature change and potential positive feedbacks that may amplify warming across the globe .
This study seeks to integrate and synthesize knowledge of evaporation ( a key component of the climate system ) at multiple scales in order to improve model predictions in Arctic ecosystems .
Additionally , this research is expected to increase our knowledge of the complex interactions among the atmosphere , soils , biota , and permafrost in Arctic ecosystems .
Finally , results from this study may be used as a basis for developing and implementing a complete carbon , water , and nitrogen model for improving our understanding of the affects of climate change in Arctic tundra regions .
As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award , this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research career .
Proposal # 0220631PI Mahmoud Abd-allahInstitution Central State UniversityTitle Scholarships for Academic Recruiting and RetentionThis project , called Scholarships for Academic Recruiting and Retention ( SARR ) , provides scholarships to increase recruitment and retention , and graduation rates for computer science , engineering and mathematics students .
The key elements of the project are 1 ) a scholarship awards program ; 2 ) intensified recruitment of community college students ; 3 ) a broader base of student research and design experiences both on campus and in off campus internships ; 4 ) a set of support services to help scholarship recipients succeed academically and facilitate the next steps toward achieving their career goals .
The program initially accommodates 25 science , engineering and mathematics scholars in the first year and 28 scholars for each of the last three years.CSU has a number of existing activities and resources that provide a sound foundation for the proposed program .
These include a comprehensive tutoring program , a supplemental instruction program , a first- web-based course applicability system that allows community college students to quickly assess course equivalencies and academic ranking for CSU programs , and a learning communities program that facilitates student collaborative study to improve academic performance .
CSU has established standards for the scholarship awards to provide entry to students who are just beginning to realize their potential , while strongly motivating them to push for and to sustain higher levels of academic achievement .
SARR provides a network of support services for the scholarship recipients to assist them in overcoming any problems that might impede their progress , and to smooth the way to meet their academic and career objectives .
The core of the support network is the assignment of faculty mentors to scholarship recipients .
These mentors are charged with tracking and reporting on the progress of their students throughout their undergraduate residence , and for five years beyond .
Mentors also counsel students on academic and aptitude matters , and guide them in maximizing their educational experiences and career opportunities .
Other elements of the support network provide assistance in finding other sources of financial support if needed , facilitate student participation in internship opportunities , provide entry level career placement assistance , and provide graduate/professional school entry guidance and assistance .
Fell0232373Exploratory Research Presence and biodiversity of uncultured fungi inAntarctic Dry ValleysProject Summary/Abstract Fungi , as decomposers of organic material , have worldwide importance as primary drivers of the global carbon cycle .
The present knowledge of fungal roles and capabilities is derived from cultured organisms .
A large unknown commodity is the presence and biodiversity of uncultured species .
Studies of uncultured prokaryotes have indicated that the culturable species may represent a minor and possibly functionally unimportant fraction of the community .
The present study will determine the community structure of the uncultured fungi in soils from the Antarctic Dry Valleys .
Because the occurrence of these eukaryotes in these samples is theoretical and problematical , the research is a high-risk venture .
The research will be undertaken as a project of opportunity in conjunction with a field project conducted by the University of Maine ( UM ) to examine the biological role of yeasts in the Dry Valleys .
The UM field team will provide soil samples for the U. Miami Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science ( RSMAS ) studies .
Methods to examine uncultured fungal communities are made possible through the development of molecular techniques .
UM will identify , by sequence analysis , the cultured species .
RSMAS will identify uncultured fungi by DNA extraction from Antarctic soils , PCR amplification of ribosomal DNA with eukaryotic- , fungal- , basidiomycete- and ascomycete-specific primers .
The resulting amplicons will be cloned and sequence analyzed .
Based on positive results , the cooperative UM/RSMAS research will provide the opportunity to study the roles , functions and species interactions of previously unknown components of the soil microbiota in the Antarctic and other ecosystems throughout the world .
This project will provide a research opportunity and training for a post-doctoral scientist .
This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is targeted to save semiconductor wafers from being deeply scratched by unchecked large errant agglomerates in chemical mechanical planarizing or polishing ( CMP ) slurries .
CMP has become the method of choice for restoring the surface trueness of wafers at all stages of integrated circuit manufacture .
No method currently exists that can implement a CMP-safe slurry at the point of use .
The proposed novel technology of Acoustic Coaxing Induced Microcavitation ( ACIM ) is a means to constructively control acoustic microcavitation and direct its high intensity energy implosions at specific particle sites .
ACIM will achieve both the detection and destruction of the stray large particles andrender the entire slurry CMP-safe at the point of use .
A high-end wafer scratched at the final stages of manufacturer results in a large direct loss .
Using ACIM to save post-CMP wafers is therefore a direct savings .
The ACIM Wafer Saver , the slurry monitor-comminuter , would be the first fully in-line , real-time , point of use device for detecting stray large particles and agglomerates , and for reducing them to a nano-fine state .
The rapidly growing CMP industry presents a well-developed market for this environmentally friendly ACIM tool .
This Small Business Innovation Research ( SBIR ) Phase I project will provide practical tools for visualizing real-time road traffic data and computer-generated traffic simulations using 2D and 3D animation for broadcast and the Internet .
Except for weather forecasts , data-driven animations are rarely produced in real-time from live data .
Traffic visualization contains more challenges than weather visualization .
The objective of this project is to determine the feasibility of building practical , fully functional tools to access data in a timely fashion and produce a compelling animation within seconds .
This tool must model traffic incidents and flow in a timely and accurate fashion .
The anticipated result includes animation and video-production tools that will be converted to a commercial product during Phase II.Potential applications include TV broadcasts , traffic control centers , police dispatch centers , and visualization tools for transportation studies and planning .
In addition , the animation principles derived from this project could be applicable to visualizing other real-time data in an animation .
The first application is broadcast television , for morning traffic segments .
Further applications include traffic control centers , dispatches , and tools for transportation planning .
A third domain of application is information dissemination on small-screen displays ( PDA , etc ) when the bandwidth and market materialize .
This Small Business Innovation Research ( SBIR ) Phase I project will investigate the two primary barriers to the commercialization of super-resolution video enhancement , namely , that ( 1 ) the motion compensation-based video enhancement algorithms are extremely computationally-intensive , and ( 2 ) the ability to extract additional visual information from digital video is highly dependent on image sequence content .
Provided that people , objects , and entire scenes move in subpixel increments between video frames or fields , this motion can be exploited by temporally integrating neighboring pictures to increase spatial resolution and to actually see details where there were once blocky pixels .
The proposed research focuses on determining the feasibility of significantly increasing the processing speed of the associated numerical algorithms on desktop and notebook personal computers running Microsoft Windows or Linux , as well as determining the feasibility of automatically detecting the video frames/fields which contribute additional information to a specific region-of-interest selected for enhancement.A number of commercial applications in forensic image analysis for law enforcement and security end-users can be developed around this technology .
Super resolution video enhancement is of particular interest to government agencies , such as the Department of Defense and the Department of Justice for extracting additional details from reconnaissance and surveillance video , as well as to the private sector for forensic image analysis in law enforcement , surveillance , and security .
By successfully tackling the proposed technical objectives , the capability will be developed to embed super-resolution enhancement video technology into commercial nonlinear video editing software packages such as Adobe Premiere .
This research develops the theory underlying the aggregate production function to show how labor market policies affect output and total factor productivity in particular .
Labor market policies affect output as a result of distorting how individual production units react to the economic environment .
In this context two economies with access to the same level of technology can have two different levels of total factor productivity .
This research develops a formal explicit theory of the nexus between labor market policies and macroeconomic performance , and attempts to empirically verify the effects of such policies on measured cross-country productivity differences .
This Small Business Innovation Research ( SBIR ) Phase I project aims on creating a visualization technology for advanced analysis of large multivariate datasets .
Such technology will be harnessed for finding hidden dependences in data , revealing its cluster structure , selection of features , and finding regions of extreme values of the functions defined on the data .
Successful solutions of such problems require preserving the most important distances between data patterns in a lower dimension .
Currently existingvisualization methods only preserve distances for datasets of the size up to few thousands .
Many applications in the process industries , bio-informatics , medicine , and defense include analysis of datasets containing large datasets with 10,000-1 million patterns .
The hierarchical technique suggested in this project will expand the use of visualization for advanced data analysis to that range of datasets .
The first applicationsare seen in process industries such as power generation .
Broader use of this innovation is anticipated in medicine , bio-informatics , and defense for knowledge discovery through revealing the structure of data .
This project will be used in education for teaching multivariate analysis .
The Phase I activities are expected to create a foundation for further development in Phase II , leading to integration in a commercial software package .
The first applications of this visualization technology will be for building models for use in coal-fired power plants advanc pollution control systems .
The visualization tool will become part of a commercially available package and will be incorporated into a more comprehensive data analysis , modeling , optimization , and control systems .
Medicine , bio-informatics , and defense are seen as additional potential beneficiaries of the visualization tool .
This Small Business Innovation Research ( SBIR ) Phase I project will develop inexpensive methods to pretreat commercial powdered activated carbons ( PAC ) used for power plant mercury control so that they will not interfere with effective use of fly ash in concretes .
The objective of this project is to screen and optimize such pretreatment methods .
Major project tasks include producing pretreated samples ; testing for effects on AEAs , resulting cements , and mercury removal performance ; and developing a fundamental understanding of the chemical processes involved .
Carbon materials researchers at Brown University and their Energy and Environmental Technologies Laboratory will assist in the effort .
Commercially the substitution of fly ash wastes for cement in construction applications is one of America.s biggest recycling successes .
Unfortunately , it was recently discovered that if even minimal PAC is injected into power plant flue gases for mercury emission control , the fly ash will be rendered unusable for concrete .
The highly-adsorbent carbons severely interfere with the air-entraining admixtures ( AEAs ) added to concrete for air entrainment and stabilization .
The economic implications for utilities may be huge .
Thus the PAC pretreatments developed here which minimize adverse effects on AEA while enhancing , or at least not degrading , PAC mercury removal performance are of prime importance .
This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will focus on synthesis methods to bring the cost of perflurocyclobutyl ( PFCB ) containing polymers to commercially practical levels .
PFCBs are exciting photonic materials due to their breakthrough optical performance and manufacturing characteristics of low optical transmission loss , high Tg , broad refractive index tailorability , and excellent melt and solution processability .
Optical performance is tailored based on the fluorine content and backbone structure of the polymer , making synthesis innovation of this family of photonic materials critical to achieving unique performance and commercial availability .
The photonic materials market is projected to grow significantly due to the step change in performance for electronic materials .
Commercialization will be achieved through sale of the polymer into the optical device market .
This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project uses wireless handheld devices that are interconnected to create an educational simulation architecture called C5 , supporting simulations that are compact , connected , continuous , customizable , and collective .
C5 tightly connects four information technologies handheld devices to run individual and distributed simulations ; a desktop computer with a wireless network hub acting as the simulation manager ; the Web as a live data and information source ; and .
end-user customization entailing customization of simulations and the integration of real time Web information into simulations .
Because next generation handheld devices are sophisticated regarding the following features speed , networking , and display ; they are capable , respectively , of running complex simulations , of running distributed simulations over fast wireless networks , and of displaying high resolution color .
Thus , handheld devices promise tools well beyond electronic versions of paper and pencil applications .
Individuals can run handheld versions of interactive simulations and collectively create advanced distributed simulations .
The research objectives of this project are to explore cognitive ( interface ) , pedagogical ( classroom ) , technical ( hardware and software ) and commercial issues for handheld-based simulations .
The proffered education simulation architecture portends the revolution to come ; it has the potential to provide cost effective information technology enabling learning and scientific exploration in wide range of fields , such as life sciences , biology , health , political science , and economics .
While the project initially focuses on K-12 , it ultimately aims to generate the more general lifelong learning markets that include distance learning , secondary education , home schooling and corporate training .
This Small Business Innovation and Research Phase I project will design and develop an innovative technology that enables those at the edge of the Internet to easily and efficiently become Web publishers .
The solution is a compatible enhancement to the existing Web that counters the notion that all Web content be published in a hub and spoke fashion from central servers .
The primary distinction between Web server and client thus becomes one of chosen roles , not physical location in a fixed topology .
The project addresses the special needs of lightweight Web publishing , including intermittent connections ( dial-up and wireless ) , location independence ( roaming , dynamic DNS/IP address ) , modest resources ( handheld devices ) , and limited bandwidth .
The solution builds upon Creare 's RBNB DataTurbine middleware , which provides asynchronous access to cached sequential information , a proven technology for peer-to-peer data distribution at educational and government research facilities .
The project adapts and applies RBNB as a Web solution ( WebTurbine ) , and , in Phase I , will demonstrate it by establishing a wireless Web publisher and publishing live video images to the Internet ( viewable by our NSF sponsors ) .
Commercialization Prospects Millions of new publishers , now inhibited by cost and technical hurdles , will publish to the Internet .
The unique capabilities of RBNB will enable the scientific and educational community to collaborate in a manner far more time-sensitive and flexible than is now possible .
Our solution creates new commercial opportunities for seamless streaming media , a new approach to virtual private networks , and a micro payment pay-per-transaction model .
EDUCAUSE has recently been asked by the Critical Infrastructure Assurance Office ( CIAO ) of the federal government to coordinate the contributions of the higher education community to the National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace .
This report , scheduled to be delivered from the Critical Infrastructure Protection Board to the President of the United States this summer , will examine the following government 's role , private sector contributions , whether or not legislation is needed , and the impact of improved security education .
The activities in this proposal will make a direct contribution toward this important national effort.The research and education community faces a pressing need for effective and efficientstrategies for securing its networked computers .
The security of college and universitycomputer systems has become a matter of critical importance for higher education and the greater Internet community .
In one well-known example , vulnerable systems on campus networks have been implicated as unknowing participants in a Distributed Denial of Service ( DDOS ) attack on critical government and commercial Internet sites .
College and university computer systems have also been the target of attacks , exposing confidential medical and student records .
A comprehensive and systematic cybersecurity strategy is needed in the higher education community , including an executive-level appreciation for the critical importance of this problem.There is a need for a coordinated approach on two fronts ( 1 ) the examination andidentification of best practices regarding available technologies , policies , and procedures to support secure operations , and ( 2 ) publications , presentations , and other communication methods to disseminate these best practices throughout the research andeducation community.To accomplish these tasks , EDUCAUSE will bring together the leading experts in bothtechnology and higher education business practices and policies to develop the bestpractical approach to solving these problems in the higher education community .
EDUCAUSE will distribute the best practices though extensive national and regional meetings , publications for IT staff as well as higher education executives , web libraries , and through partner organizations such as the American Council on Education ( ACE ) , theNational Association of College and University Business Officers ( NACUBO ) , and theNational Association of College and University Attorneys ( NACUA ) .
This proposed effort will build on previous work by the EDUCAUSE/Internet2 Security Taskforce , member institutions , SANS , and CERT and would seek to incorporate the best efforts of the federal government and private industry .
This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will investigate the feasibilityof developing a technology to optimize accumulation and subsequent removal of a valuable element from integrated gasification combined-cycle ( IGCC ) systems .
IGCC is a highly efficient , low-emissions technology that uses coal and other feed stocks to produce electricity , process heat , and high-value fuels and chemicals .
Deposits containing a valuable metalloid accumulate in an IGCC system , requiring significant downtime forcleaning and loss of revenue .
The proposed technology will lead to recovery of ametalloid as part of routine operation of IGCC systems .
Metalloid capture will be performed using bench-scale laboratory equipment with a simulated gasification environment .
Bonding mechanisms will be characterized to determine if spalling of deposits through thermal cycling and soot blowing is a feasible method of recovering deposits on-line.This innovation would substantially increase revenue by providing a marketable product stream and would decrease operating and maintenance costs by improving the efficiency of the system .
This Small Business Innovation Research ( SBIR ) Phase I project will investigate the effect of carbon nanotubes on the photoconductivity of electroactive polymer matrix composites and on their performance and sensing efficiency .
Several formulations of additives/polymer ( s ) , including functionalized carbon nanotube systems , have potential to interact selectively , sensitively , and reversibly with trace analytes in the electroactive matrix .
Nanotube-polymer sensing probes based on conductivity changes or mechanical force fluctuations exerted by the surrounding media , will be developed and tested for their sensitivity , reversibility , fast response to different analytes , and chemical and environmental stability .
Superior formulations will be tested and compared to existing commercial sensing materials .
Commercially , conventional metal oxide and polymer based sensors are usually impractical at ambient temperature due to low sensitivity .
The combination of advanced conformal coating processes and advanced formulations of nanotube/polymers has the potential to alleviate the sensitivity and response to inorganic , organic , and biological analytes .
These low cost ultra-light weight nanotube-polymer composite films with improved structural , stability and electrical properties will be important for portable sensor applications .
This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I Project will optimize a newly developed ceramic-metallic ( cermet ) resistive heating material and prove its feasibility for use in diesel particulate filters .
Objectives include optimization of the cermet composition and laminates , characterization of physical properties , and development of multi-layer ceramic tape manufacturing methods for producing multichannel filter monoliths with integral cermet heating elements .
The research will optimize the cermet composition based on analysis of life and temperature cycling , heat transfer capabilities , and thermal gradient control .
The anticipated result of the project will be a small-scale particulate filter with an integral cermet heating element that provides continuous thermal oxidation of particulates .
The new cermet heating material has immediate commercial potential as a heating element that can be integrated into diesel particulate filter structures for the continuous thermal oxidation of particulates ( at approximately 600 C ) .
With new emissions controls scheduled to take effect in 2007 , there is presently a compelling need for a compact , simple-to-maintain , durable , and effective diesel particulate filter for both new and existing diesel-powered vehicles .
This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project focuses on producing novel cellulosic aerogels insulation materials for new construction .
This project will focus on producing ultra-lightweight cellulose aerogels with exceptional high thermal insulation and mechanical performance .
In the project new cellulosic aerogels will be designed and fabricated .
Samples will be characterized by scanning electron microscopy and surface area/ pore size measurements and then optimized for thermal insulation , mechanical performance and hydrophobicity.Commercially , ultra-lightweight and hard cellulose aerogel will be useful not only as thermal insulator material for building construction but also as a shock absorbent ( military helmet , automobile , etc ) , in clothing and in space suit applications .
Thermal insulation is a major industry serving a wide range of residential and industrial application needs .
Development of a new super-insulation material will maximize fuel efficiency in process industries and reduce heating and utility bills in residential markets .
This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses the need to synthesize very large silicon chips designs in very short time .
Currently available commercial synthesis tools are based on the methodology , data structures , and algorithms that are predominantly algebraic ( as opposed to more efficient Boolean methods ) , and are characterized by slow run time and inadequate design quality .
This SBIR project is devoted to the development of efficient algorithms and techniques for logic synthesis based on modern BDD data structures .
At the heart of the algorithms is a novel BDD decomposition theory , recently developed by company researchers .
The resulting commercial product is a software solution for very fast , high-performance logic synthesis ; as indicated by initial experiments it will be at least an order of magnitude faster than software tools available on the market today .
The main version of the product is a core engine for logic synthesis used in several classes of applications ASICs , microprocessors , and FPGAs .
Another version of the tool will target formal verification , which also relies on fast logic optimization .
The logic optimization engine can be plugged into any existing synthesis flow utilized by customers and offered by the existing EDA software vendors The SBIR Phase I project will stimulate research in design automation and inject much needed innovation in the EDA industry .
This work will culminate in the development of a next generation , high-performance logic synthesis system that will have a significant commercial impact on the EDA tools market .
This activity will also have important educational impact .
It will educate a new generation of design engineers and students by exposing them to new design methodologies and innovations pioneered by this project .
This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project seeks to develop , deploy , and evaluate a virtual reality-based modeling kit , called Contagious Disease Modeling ( CDM ) Toolkit , which will enable students to build virtual 3-D models of viruses and bacteria within a web-based inquiry framework .
This system will enable students to explore fundamental questions of virus/bacteria trajectories , infection methodologies , public health strategies , and treatments .
Built on a simulation of virtual people 's activity in the home ( similar to The Sims game , where one can set up a household , define the character traits of the residents , and control their interactions ) , students will create models related to infectious diseases models of viruses and bacteria that will infect the virtual people , models of immune system and treatment interventions that will fight viruses and bacteria , and models of behavior that will enact public safety recommendations .
Research has shown that students do not effectively blend lectures , 2-D static images , and textual descriptions of scientific phenomena .
Building virtual reality models is the right match for the content and builds deep understanding of the 3-D nature of science concepts and the inquiry skills of model based science .
This instructional approach and base technology , by Cybernet Systems , has the potential to open up an entirely new mode of instruction that will be extendable to many other mathematics , science , and technology domains .
The market will be middle school life science , high school , undergraduate and graduate biology , graduate public and environmental health , and professional medical-related programs including medicine and nursing .
The researchers are holding a workshop as part of the Political Science Program 's Experimental Implications of Theoretic Models activity .
They are focusing on the linkage between formal and empirical analyses of repeated social dilemma games .
Understanding cooperation in the context of social dilemma games is fundamental to understanding how alternative institutional arrangements may foster collective action in a wide diversity of political settings .
An abundance of experimental evidence is inconsistent with predictions from existing non-cooperative game-theoretic models based strictly on self-regarding preferences .
In recent years , scholars have turned to alternative representations of utility in an attempt to capture motivational heterogeneity across individuals .
While multiple models have been posited , no one model yet appears to explain the rich data that has been obtained by multiple experimental researchers who have conducted a very large number o repeated social dilemma experiments using various specifications of many variables including The size of the collective benefit obtained if all participants cooperated ; The level of knowledge that individuals have about each other 's identity ; The number of participants involved ; The nature of communication among subjects ; and , The possibility of sanctioning one another.While many theoretical possibilities have been generated , no one has been able to test his or her ideas against an aggregated data set covering all of these conditions precisely , because such a data set has not yet been put together and made publicly available .
Given the diversity of formal models and large number of experiments that have already been conducted , the time is ripe to create a multicampus , multidisciplinary Research Work Team toplan the construction of an easy-to-use consistent database containing many data sets contributed by experimental researchers ; review recent formal models explaining levels of cooperation in repeated social dilemmas in order to examine similarities and differences in theoretical structure as well as in predictions derived from alternative models ; plan further analyses of these data in order to test the models comprehensively ; refine better theoretical models to explain cooperation in repeated social dilemmas ; provide a general scientific plan for developing further theoretical and empirical research in light of the results of the above steps.The researchers are holding the first meeting of the Research Work Team in January , 2003 , and this project focuses primarily on the plans for this meeting .
This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project possesses a unique chemical detection technology in which colorimetric changes in an array of dyes constitute a signal much like that generated by the mammalian olfaction system ; each dye is a cross-responsive sensor .
This technology has recently been expanded into the realm of the detection of aqueous analytes for use as an electronic tongue - dubbed TasteSeeing .
Preliminary results indicate that near-instantaneous , vivid responses are obtained from small solution samples and that the majority of the array appears to be robust in water .
This Phase I program is designed to evaluate the sensitivity , specificity and reproducibility of the technology as a methodology to characterize aqueous solutions .
This technique , while attractive to a wide range of markets , will initially be focused on the detection and identification of potential terrorist chemical agents.The goal is to integrate the TasteSeeing technology into a portable and inexpensive device to detect rapidly low levels of dissolved chemicals in water and other fluids .
This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project targets conversion of a technique perfected for washing hydrocarbons in the oil industry , fiber film reactor ( FFR ) technology , into a production organic synthesis technique .
A FFR will be constructed in Phase I and two reactions studied- an epoxy polyol reaction and an epoxy synthesis .
Feasibility will be proven by demonstrating producible conversion yields .
FFR is an elegant , economical , and environmentally friendly approach to production-scale organic synthesis .
Both PTC-based and conventional processing methods will benefit from FFR technology .
The commercial market value of FFR processing is enormous - over 3 billion pounds annually of organic production could potentially benefit from FFR .
The environmental advantages are compelling - a waste factor due to emulsion in DGEBA production of just 0.05 % would add 250,000 pounds to our national waste streams- and the added costs to the manufacturer in materials and time are equally huge .
These two factors will drive FFR demand .
This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project entitled Electron BeamCuring of Polymer Interlayer in Silicon Carbide Joints will develop the technology toenable economical commercialization of silicon carbide components .
Current joining techniques are too time consuming to be economically viable for commercialization and mass production They tend to produce excessive polymer shrinkage and thus require excessive number of polymer infiltrations .
The proposed pulsed electron beam curing technology will remove these obstacles bycompleting the polymer cross-linking in the microsecond time scale , which is comparableto the duration of the electron beam pulse .
In this Phase I effort , the polymer shrinkagein the interlayer material will be studied first by subjecting it to electron beam irradiation.The resulting samples will be compared to those processed under conventional method , i.e. , without undergoing electron beam processing .
This will then be followed by theproduction of SiC joints .
These joined test samples , produced with electron beam curing , will again be compared to a control joint sample .
Computer simulation code will be usedto guide the experiments.Success of this project will pave the way for commercializingSiC components in many different industrial and manufacturing markets , includingpetrochemical , semiconductor , heat-treating and heat-exchanger systems , aircraft andterrestrial gas turbines , and aircraft structural components .
This Small Business Innovation Research ( SBIR ) Phase I project focuses on the development of an Intrusion Detection System ( IDS ) based on recognizing anomalous system call patterns via finite state machines .
Networked information systems play critical roles in essential infrastructures such as power generation and distribution , transportation , commerce , and national security .
The continuing spate of security incidents from the CERT Coordination Center ( the CERT/CC was originally the Computer Emergency Response Team ) demonstrates that existing approaches for securing systems against cyber attacks are not effective .
These approaches are focused almost exclusively on previously exploited vulnerabilities , and offer no protection against attacks that may exploit countless ( as-yet-undiscovered ) vulnerabilities that continue to exist on the target systems .
Whereas current threats are largely attributed to unskilled hackers ( script kiddies ) , the future holds the threat of rapid escalation of cyber-warfare , cyber-terrorism and cyber-crime .
Attackers in these cases are highly skilled , organized and well funded , and can develop new kinds of attacks very quickly .
Thus there is an urgent need for developing approaches that can protect against unknown attacks launched by highly skilled attackers .
In previous research conducted at SUNY , Stony Brook , the key personnel have developed a new approach for securing systems against unknown attacks .
Immunet Security 's approach is based on a new algorithm for learning program behaviors using finite-state automata models and detecting attacks as deviations from this model .
The approach has been show to be very effective in detecting known as well as unknown attacks and produces significantly fewer false alarms than previous approaches .
This proposal seeks to develop the approach into a commercial intrusion detection system ( IDS ) .
The market for commercial Intrusion Detection Systems ( IDS ) is large , running into billions of dollars , and is growing fast .
Given the market for IDS and the heightened national interest in security , this technology offers the possibility of more sensitive detection than currently exists .
This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will research , develop , and deliver an unsurpassed high performance video teleconferencing ( VTC ) system in software , based on Internet Engineering Task Force ( IETF ) protocols and the growing Quality of Service ( QoS ) - provisioning IP architecture .
This VTC system will be specifically designed for premier telemedicine application over broadband IP networks in the USA and throughout the world , and will provide a great help for achieving `` Healthy People 2010 '' by reducing the cost of health care for both the providers and patients , extending the high-quality services otherwise limited by location and time .
Specifically , this Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is to ( a ) design and analyze improved transport mechanisms for real-time interactive telemedicine oriented VTC , as well as control and management mechanisms of IP networks with some measures of QoS guarantees ; ( b ) design high-speed high performance , error resilient , and network-friendly layered video coding and transmission scheme ; ( c ) analyze the interaction between the VTC transport mechanism and the IP network.s service provisioning mechanisms to find the best feasible combination , and explore , in particular , the relationship between the importance-based video layering and the network.s methods of differentiating the QoS grades .
The commercial applications of the project are premier telemedicine services at low cost required by health care providers and patients , as well as high quality VTC services required by government organizations and corporations .
This Small Business Innovation Research ( SBIR ) Phase I project will permit production of sodium chlorate without the addition of Na2Cr2O7 to the electrolyte during electrolysis and thereby eliminate all the treatment steps involved in removing chromate to achieve zero chrome in the crystal chlorate and in the plant effluent streams .
We propose to investigate various non-chrome based , poorly conducting , porous films .
Such films will be formed on the cathode before assembly of the cell .
We propose to demonstrate the superior performance of such coatings for the production of chlorate in an environmentally acceptable manner .
Potential customers for this innovation include producers of electrolytic sodium chlorate and the sodium chlorate technology suppliers .
Currently , the world production capacity of NaClO3 is 2,800,000 metric tons/year , with the North American share being 1,950,000 metric tons .
This industry is projected to grow at an annual rate of 2-3 % through 2005 .
This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a highly accurate reconstruction module for Godunov-type schemes to upgrade the capability of current multidisciplinary computational software packages for simulation of a class of engineering problems with small scales and high frequencies .
The unique and innovative aspect of this work is to combine both Weighted Essentially Non-Oscillatory ( WENO ) concept and compact differencing into a single upwind algorithm .
Instead of using multiple polynomial candidates , a hybrid power-exponential spline is used as the underlying interpolation for a WENO scheme with local smoothness measures as the perturbation parameters .
In this way , the weight functions of a WENO scheme can be analytically determined from the underlying interpolation .
Their Taylor series expansions around the smooth regions can be used for further accuracy improvement .
The resulting piecewise quadratic reconstruction with compact difference computed slope and curvature can dramatically reduce numerical diffusion inherent in upwind schemes .
By using this upwind scheme , the numerical simulation of vortex dominated flows , boundary layers , turbulence , acoustic waves , and electromagnetic waves , etc. , can be significantly improved without loss of the shock-capturing feature .
The highly accurate reconstruction module , which is independent of physics , can be easily integrated into the current production and research codes and has the potential of providing cost improvement of at least an order of magnitude over the current versions .
This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop innovative , grid-free , numerical models of two-phase , particulate , incompressible turbulent flows .
The intent is to provide a high fidelity model for the simulation and analysis of numerous environmental and industrial flow applications wherein particulate motion is a critical feature .
Among the potential benefits are more accurate and timely predictions of health hazards and abatement strategies for the late-time dynamics of toxic particulates or contaminant clouds arising from routine , accidental or purposeful chemical and biological releases .
This work will be applicable to the dynamics of pollutants in the atmosphere , particulate flows in liquids , two-phase turbulent mixing and particulate dispersion , among others .
This revolutionary technology will expand its potential computational fluid dynamics ( CFD ) market share by extending its capabilities to treat complex flows which are of great importance to including aircraft manufacturing , automobile manufacturing and power generation .
AbstractComputational Complexity in Combinatorial and Algebraic ModelsA fundamental goal of research in theory of computing is to understand the inherent computational complexity of specific problems .
Progress in computational complexity is essential to establish limits to efficiency of algorithms , to understand the role of randomness in computation , and to build rigorous foundations for important areas such as cryptography and machine learning .
This research program will study complexity questions in several combinatorial and algebraic models of computation .
In particular , this research will develop lower bound techniques for these models based on linear algebra , communication complexity , and graph theory .
Specific directions of research proposed are1 .
Robustness Functions of Matrix Rank and their Applications broad classes of functions that describe the robustness of the rank of a matrix have wide-ranging applications in computational complexity .
In particular , several such functions can be used to attack lower bound problems on Boolean and algebraic circuits , decision trees , branching programs , and communication complexity .
Known results by the PI and other researchers also indicate that spectral methods provide a unified approach to understanding rank robustness .
This project proposes to extend these techniques and apply them to study combinatorial and algebraic complexity .
Some alternative approaches that may overcome certain technical barriers faced by existing methods are also studied.2 .
Multiparty Communication Complexity This fundamental model has applications to the complexity theory of circuits , branching programs , and time-space trade-offs .
Some weaker models of multiparty communication complexity have recently been investigated due to their continued relevance to circuit complexity and the apparent hope for stronger lower bounds .
This project will study the relative strengths of the various multiparty models and their connections to complexity theory .
General techniques such as discrepancy bounds and tensor rigidity will be explored to attack lower bound questions in these models .
Recent discoveries of unexpected upper bounds in this area with critical consequences to some lower bound approaches motivate several new questions .
3 .
Graph Theoretic Approaches to Boolean Function Complexity A combinatorial model that generalizes the models of both Boolean circuits and two-party communication complexity is obtained by considering computations on graphs .
The research will explore the effectiveness of some graph-theoretic techniques to Boolean complexity using the framework of this model .
In particular , various linear algebraic representations of graphs , with potential applications to other areas , will be studied to derive lower bounds on graph complexity that may have consequences to circuits .
A unifying theme among these three topics is the use of communication complexity techniques to attack lower bound questions in computational complexity .
Furthermore , each of these topics provides potential approaches to attack some long-standing open questions in computational complexity such as superlinear size lower bounds on log-depth circuits and ACC circuits .
More generally , the research will advance the technology for lower bounds by targeting less restricted and/or more abstract models than those for which strong lower bounds are currently known .
Techniques developed in these topics give rise to mathematical problems that have wider interest to other branches of theoretical computer science such as algorithms and cryptography as well as to subjects like linear algebra , combinatorics , and graph theory .
This research will develop a commercial version of the SHOWME ( Systematic Historical Overview of Water Management and Environmental ) database for a wide variety of waste sites , groundwater basins , and water resource projects .
Each SHOWME plot will include a concise informative display of 40-60 chemicals with regulatory limits , well location map , sampling depth , geology , water levels , and well construction details .
SHOWME voluminous displays of water quality , geologic , and hydrologic data are designed for expedited site characterization and environmental restoration .
Site workers , regulators , stakeholders , and the concerned public spend hours to understand environmental data .
The processed informative displays in SHOWME will help avoid the collection of trivial data and delay in environmental restoration .
0232724WentworthThis three-year award for U.S.-France collaboration in mathematics involves Richard A. Wentworth at Johns Hopkins University and Elisha Falbel at the University of Paris VI .
The objective of this project is a concentrated collaborative research effort in the area of discrete groups and geometrical analysis of low dimensional manifolds .
They will study representation of surface groups in U ( n ) and the deformation theory and rigidity issues of spherical CR manifolds .
The U.S. investigator brings to this collaboration expertise in the geometrical analytic aspects of representations of surface groups .
This is complemented by French expertise in CR manifolds , discrete groups and their deformations .
This award represents the U.S. side of a joint proposal to the NSF and the French National Center for Scientific Research ( CNRS ) .
NSF will cover travel funds and living expenses for the U.S. investigator and graduate student .
The CNRS will support the visits of the French researcher and student to the United States .
U.S. and French graduate students will benefit from the international approach to research and international exposure for their work .
This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a novel process capable of high-volume production of monodisperse nanoparticles of arbitrary metallic composition .
Such highly-controlled materials are desired as components for engineered nanostructures .
The current standard precipitate or aerosol processes for metal nanoparticle formation are limited in available materials , the particle size distribution , or productivity .
In this project an adaptation to jetting processes will be used to enable formation of metal nanojets and nanoparticles .
Because this is entirely a physical process , it is expected to be able to be adapted to any metal alloy .
second The specific tasks of the project will inolve survey of possible approaches , analyzing the proposed process , and preparing the preliminary design of the key parts of a prototype apparatus .
The objective is a system capable of the precise formation of nanojets and monosize nanoparticles at rates greater than one gram per second .
Commerically , there are many possible long-term applications for metal nanoparticles .
Nanoelectronics and high-density data storage are two appealing examples .
The established markets for the technology described with the most initial opportunity relevant to this proposal appear to be in the following fields solid propellants , explosives , and catalysts .
Monodisperse nanoparticles will allow mechanical packing into ordered array structures for filtration .
The high surface area of nanoparticles enables their use as substrates for catalysis of chemical reactions .
While supported by these initial markets , further innovation in many other markets and derivative technologies ( such as oxide ceramic nanoparticles , and nano-patterning devices ) will be developed from this new technology .
This technology offers a means of producing significant quantities of monodisperse nano-spheres at commodity prices .
It also enables further significant innovations in nanoscale fabrication , materials and processing .
This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a Micro-Force Test Apparatus inside a Scanning Electron Microscope to better learn the micromechanical properties of materials and MEMS devices .
The project will explore mechanical properties of MEMS devices as well as individual phases in metals .
The properties to be explored are compressive strength , shear strength , tensile strength , flex , and peel .
In addition , microgrippers will be added to the end of the linear motion feed though .
This addition will allow for assembly of other components using various attachment techniques including thermoset polymer adhesives , solders and brazes .
The potential commercial application for the Microforce Testing System and fixtures will be to characterize materials such as metals and ceramics and MEMS-type devices .
The proposal requests funding for partial support of the 7th Tau 2002 Conference to be held at the Santa Cruz Institute for Particle Physics , September 10-13 , 2002.The conference will include the physics of the tau lepton , neutrino physics and the role of the tau neutrino in neutrino oscillations and precision measurements of QCD where tau data have an impact .
It will enhance the interaction between the leading theorists and experimentalists in the field .
The funds will be used to partially cover the costs of travel for participants .
Many large , important scientific and commercial applications use very large data sets that do not fit into available RAM .
Such applications have to frequently move portions of their data sets between main memory and secondary storage ( such as disks ) .
Unfortunately , because disks are several orders of magnitude slower than RAM , many large applications spend most of their running time on disk I/Os , resulting in a significant performance degradation.A lot of research has been carried out to address this problem .
Generally , the previous solutions include application-specific algorithms and libraries , compiler-based techniques , and limited Operating System ( OS ) support .
While these solutions are effective , they also have some serious drawbacks .
In this proposal , the PI proposes careful OS and architecture co-designs of several novel methods that can significantly improve the performance of large , memory-intensiveapplications .
The basic idea is to use hardware/software to collect and analyze the runtime memory access patterns of applications .
The knowledge of these patterns is then used to guide prefetching and to improve the page-replacement algorithms.Preliminary results from the proposed systems show very promising improvements in performance .
They can drastically reduce the amount ofpage I/O traffic , and hide latencies of many page I/Os .
Simulation results based on NPB ( NAS Parallel Benchmarks ) benchmarks show that pattern-guided prefetching and page-replacement can improve performance by up to 100 times .
The proposed methods are transparent to user applications .
The proposed studies , if successful , will have broad impacts on the field of high performance computing .
The awardee will construct and deploy two eight-panel radars as the next step in the continuing engineering development of the Advanced Modular Incoherent Scatter Radar ( AMISR ) .
These radars will use production-level hardware , as opposed to the engineering prototype subassemblies constructed for earlier development efforts .
The proposed deployment locations in Gakona , Alaska and Jicamarca , Peru will allow testing the radar hardware in actual operating conditions , using realistic pulse patterns and data acquisition algorithms .
The locations were chosen because they each provide coherent scatter targets of scientific interest and with anticipated return strengths that should be readily detectable by the smaller radars .
The two locations are also ideal in that they represent two very different environmental conditions , providing a good test of system integrity .
Furthermore , they both have sufficient local infrastructure to keep the deployment costs reasonable .
This project will help reduce risk and enhance capability for future construction and deployment of incoherent scatter radars based on the AMISR design .
This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes a molecular levelelectrochemical approach to fabricate semiconductor compounds .
It targets acommercially important electro-optic application , the low temperature synthesis ofcadmium telluride thin-film for solar cells and infrared devices .
Present technology usesexpensive vapor phase deposition methods that are unsuitable for large-scale or low-temperaturefabrication .
This project will develop a low-cost , electrochemical process toproduce high quality thin-films .
Phase I will identify process parameters , demonstrate theproof of concept and validate the approach for deposition of cadmium telluride films.Phase II will extend the method to the other device layers .
Method implementation willraise the photovoltaic efficiencies and lower manufacturing costs of thin-film modules.Its success will accelerate the large-scale commercialization of this technology andprovide a timely solution to the nation 's escalating energy and environmental problems.Commercial applications of the ResearchApplications for the cadmium telluride thin film technology range from the solar cells toinfrared detectors .
Lower cost , higher efficiencies and simpler manufacturing willtranslate into a wider spectrum of commercial markets .
The nanoscale electrosynthesismethod has applications for fabricating a range of novel quantum well structures anddevices .
In this study , we will develop a molecular method to identify the cryptic larval forms of three fiddler crab species common in salt marsh communities of the southeastern United States .
While the adults of these closely related species , Uca minax , Uca pugnax , and Uca pugilator , are among the most studied of salt marsh invertebrates , work on larval and juvenile crabs has been hindered because they are morphologically indistinguishable at these early life stages .
Using a fast , inexpensive molecular assay , we will map the distribution of these three species starting in late spring when they begin to enter the mouth of South Carolina 's North Inlet estuary after completing larval development in open coastal waters until late fall when the last of the year 's young have joined the established adult populations .
From this information , we will produce a high-resolution model of the annual invasion of the marsh by Uca crabs .
We will determine the timing , position , and degree of penetration by young of the three species into habitats preferentially occupied by their adult counterparts .
We will learn if the three species migrate differently , or if their young penetrate all areas equally and differential mortality after settlement determines adult distributions within the estuary .
Estimates from the field will be refined with lab-based experiments in which young crabs of the three species will be exposed to sediment from adult habitats under low or high salinity conditions .
How young crabs respond to these environmental cues may explain their ability to locate adult habitats.The broader impact of this study lies in the molecular assay that we are developing to differentiate young of these three crab species .
Fiddler crabs heavily impact southeastern estuaries by modifying species composition , landscape topography , and water chemistry in areas where they burrow and feed .
Also , adult crabs can comprise a large portion of the diets of wetland birds and crab larvae are important prey for small fishes that are eaten by larger fishes exploited by commercial and sport fisheries .
Our assay will allow us to assess the stability of marsh ecosystems over time and will be useful in estimating crustacean biodiversity .
The development of this assay will eliminate a large hurdle in our understanding of birth , recruitment , and death in the salt marsh by allowing us to investigate the full life cycles of these widely studied crabs in detail for the first time .
INVOLVEMENT OF GLUTAMATE METABOTROPIC RECEPTORS IN SYNAPTIC PLASTICITY IN THE SPINAL CORDIt is now well established that the primary afferent fibers use glutamate as a principal fast excitatory transmitter in the superficial dorsal horn ( SDH ) of the spinal cord , the first modulatory site in the relay of sensory information from the peripheral receptors to the brain .
Glutamate acts through two broad classes of receptors , ion-channel-linked ( ionotropic ) receptors ( AMPA/kainate and NMDA receptors ) and metabotropic receptors ( mGluRs ) , which couple via G-proteins to the intracellular second messenger cascades .
Group I mGluRs ( mGluR1 and 5 subtypes ) are expressed by neurons in the SDH , but their roles in synaptic function , and contribution to spinal somatosensory transmission and synaptic plasticity , have yet to be elucidated .
The recent development of ligands that bind specifically to these receptors , and availability of mutant mice lacking mGluR1 or mGluR5 receptors , has provided means of characterizing the important roles they may play in tuning of fast and slow excitatory synaptic transmission , including the induction of long-term changes in synaptic efficacy , as suggested by our recent preliminary evidence.Two major objectives in the proposal are 1 ) to study involvement of Group I mGluRs via ICAN ( non-selective Ca2+-dependent cation channels ) in the generation of primary afferent-evoked slow excitatory synaptic potential ( sEPSP ) in the SDH region ; and 2 ) to study regulation of AMPA and NMDA receptor-mediated sensory transmission by activation of Group I mGluRs .
A combination of intracellular and whole-cell patch-clamp recordings , Ca2+ imaging , and pharmacological techniques will be employed to study the involvement of Group I mGluR activation in synaptic transmission and plasticity in SDH neurons within spinal cord slices prepared from young rats and mutant mice lacking mGlu1 or 5 receptors.Delineating the physiological roles of the Group I mGluRs in the SDH region , and cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying their actions , is an important step toward understanding of implications of glutamate-mediated transmission in the spinal cord DH synaptic function , but in particular for synaptic plasticity and nociception .
The principal investigator plans to investigate detailed connections amongrepresentation theories of finite groups of Lie types , algebraic groups , Liealgebras , and quivers .
The research will concentrate on relating thecohomology theory of finite groups of Lie type and that of restricted Liealgebras and infinitesimal group schemes .
The goal is to describe , for agiven rational module for an algebraic group , its support varieties overfinite groups of rational points over finite fields in terms of its supportvarieties over the higher Frobenius kernels .
The principal investigatorwill also study the connections between representations of quivers andrepresentations of Kac-Moody Lie algebras and quantum groups ( and theirgeneralizations ) .
This will involve the study of subalgebras of Hallalgebras using perverse sheaves , construct canonical basis of genericsubalgebras , realize affine Lie algebras in terms of representations ofquivers , and relate them to Fock spaces .
The beauty of mathematical research lies in linking many different subjectareas together to apply available theory in many different fields .
This project is in the area of mathematics known as representation theory .
At its core , representation theory derives from the study of symmetries , i.e. , the symmetries that natural objects , from subatomic particles to planetary orbits , have .
Nowadays there are many different kinds of representation theory , each having evolved as the best way to deal with different kinds of problems .
The purpose of this project is to find and explore some of the links between some of the different kinds of representation theory .
Such links will benefit not only the study of representation theory , but also physics and other sciences that use representation theory as a standard tool .
PI Dmitry Novikov / A. Gabrielov , Purdue UniversityDMS-0200861Abstract % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % D .
Novikov and A. Gabrielov propose to investigate the globalfiniteness properties of solutions of Fuchsian systems of ordinarydifferential equations .
The goal of this research is to establisheffective upper bounds on the global oscillation of polynomialcombinations of these solutions in terms of quantitativecharacteristics of the Fuchsian systems , and to apply these resultsto the infinitesimal Hilbert 's sixteenth problem .
The main interestis the oscillation of solutions near confluent singular points ofthe hypergeometric equation.Stable oscillations of many natural systems in biology , electronics , engineering , meteorology , etc. , are described by limit cycles in thecorresponding dynamical systems .
If the dynamical system is closeto a conservative one , its limit cycles correspond to zeros ofan Abelian integral , a solution of an ordinary differentialequation with polynomial coefficients .
Unlike solutions ofalgebraic equations , such functions can have many zeros evenwhen the coefficients are low-degree polynomials .
The goal of theproposed research is to give an effective upper bound on the number ofthese zeros in terms of the magnitude of the coefficients , and thecorresponding upper bound on the number of limit cycles of thedynamical system .
This can be considered as an effective versionof the famous Hilbert 's sixteenth problem .
With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program , Professor R. Daniel Little , of the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of California , Santa Barbara , is studying the reaction chemistry of trimethylenemethane diradicals and 1,3-diyl radical cations .
Using diazenes as diradical precursors , Professor Little is exploring the factors responsible for selective formation of 8-membered ring carbocyclic compounds or their 6-membered ring isomers , as well as oxygen- and nitrogen-containing heterocyclic analogs .
Symmetrical and unsymmetrical 1,3-diyl radical cations are the subjects of studies relating to the assembly of 7- and 8-membered ring compounds as well as mechanistic analyses of cation radical equilibration and recoil accompanying loss of nitrogen from diazenes.Many organic compounds which display interesting chemical or biological activity contain 7- or 8-membered rings of atoms .
The development of efficient techniques for the synthesis of such cyclic compounds remains of great interest , particularly in light of the generally greater stability of smaller-ring ( 5- and 6-membered ) compounds .
Professor R. Daniel Little , of the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of California , Santa Barbara , is developing new reactions allowing the selective synthesis of 7- and 8-membered ring compounds and studying the factors responsible for the selectivity of these reactions .
ABSTRACTProposal DMS-0200888PI Ian DinwoodieTitle Computational algebraic methods for high-dimensional statistical applicationsThis project has the goal of research in algebraic methods for high-dimensional parametric statistical problems where classical asymptotic methods are not useful .
Connected with the research goal is work with existing and future graduate students .
The research problems arehigh-dimensional Gibbs-distribution models for network reliability and traffic with incomplete data ; optimization for parameter estimation in high-dimensional models with incomplete data and nonconvex log-likelihood functions ; fast simulation methods including fiber walks with Markov chains for integer data tables ; and multivariate exponential generating functions for computations on lattice points with the hypergeometric distribution .
A range of algebraic tools will be used , including Groebner bases in commutative rings and D-modules , elimination theory , polynomial homotopy methods , and Markov Monte Carlo methods .
This project will bring recent developments in computational algebra to new statistical applications where classical methods do not work .
Examples of such new and challenging applications are large-scale network traffic and reliability , and large databases of tabular data such as census information where security and analysis are difficult.The algebraic tools can help to solve problems of model formulation and model fitting and statistical analysis .
Many algebraic techniques have been recently developed to solve computational problems in robotics and differential equations , and these methods are very promising for statistics .
The investigators will develop these algebraic methods to solve statistical applications .
A grant has been awarded to Dr. David Foster at Harvard University to purchase a mobile canopy access platform to support research at the Harvard Forest .
Forest canopies are key sites for the exchange of mass , energy and momentum within forest ecosystems .
However , examination of the physiological and physical processes occurring within the canopy is hampered by logistic difficulties of conducting research that involves sophisticated equipment at heights far above the ground .
The funds provided in this grant will allow the purchase of a mobile canopy access platform of the type referred to as an articulated boom lift in the construction industry .
This macromanipulator will enhance ongoing projects of six investigators whose work at the Harvard Forest focuses on tree physiology , ecosystem processes , and atmosphere-biosphere exchange .
Forests are inherently three-dimensional systems .
A mobile canopy access system will provide investigators with the ability to expand their research into new areas and new dimensions .
A mobile platform is well suited to research at the Harvard Forest due to the relatively low stature of the forest ( ~ 20 m ) and the extensive network of fire roads .
At present , canopy access at the Harvard Forest is limited to a small number of fixed towers .
A mobile canopy system will allow us to extend our studies to a broader range of community types and to sample from a larger number of trees .
In addition , a mobile canopy access platform is compatible with physiological studies that frequently require the collection of destructive samples .
Specific projects that will benefit from the purchase of this instrument include Dr. Foster 's studies of the impact of the hemlock wooly adelgid , a recently introduced pest of hemlock trees , Dr. Bazzaz 's research on photosynthesis-nitrogen dynamics in forest trees , Dr. Holbrook 's studies of water transport in tall trees , Dr. Wofsy 's studies of CO2 exchange between forest ecosystems and the atmosphere , Dr. Aber 's studies of the effects of chronic nitrogen deposition on forest ecosystems , and Dr. Steudler 's research on global warming and carbon storage in mid-latitude forest ecosystems.The Harvard Forest is an important site for both research and teaching .
Much of the research at the Harvard Forest is directed at understanding the function and stability of forest ecosystems in relation to human disturbance and global climate change .
Thus , the acquisition of this instrument will contribute to our understanding of the health and resilience of this important ecosystem .
Exploratory studies will be conducted for the development of novel micro plasma reactors that are less than a millimeter in size , for the deposition of metals , dielectric materials , or polymers for microfabrication .
An intense plasma ball of less than a few hundred microns diameter can be generated under atmospheric pressure between a microelectrode and a counter electrode under suitable conditions .
Such a plasma ball is self-sustaining and is of 'cold ' type similar to the high vacuum plasma sources used in microchip manufacturing .
Based on this micro plasma ball , a radically different method of microfabrication - plasma-assisted net-shape deposition ( PAND ) - is proposed .
With the PAND method , the deposition will be carried out under atmospheric pressure to eliminate the costly high vacuum equipment .
Also , the net shape of the desired feature is 'printed ' at the substrate surface directly thereby eliminating the time-consuming and capital-intensive photolithography .
The proposed one-year project also addresses the fundamental mechanisms affecting the design and operation of the PAND reactors .
Since the experimental characterization of the atmospheric pressure micro-plasma discharge is a challenging task , comprehensive process modeling is proposed to understand the inherent physics and chemistry of the system .
Innovative modeling strategies will be used to simulate the unique discharge ( 'cold ' atmospheric pressure micro-plasma ) addressed here .
A high-resolution discharge physics model will be developed for the reactor to examine the effects of various process parameters on the ionization and dissociation characteristics of the feed gases .
The results from numerical computations and laboratory measurements will help in characterizing the 'cold ' atmospheric pressure micro-plasma .
This grant provides funding for developing innovative algorithms for solving scheduling problems with due dates .
Almost every manufacturing and service enterprise must schedule something ; jobs through a shop , customers to appointments , or trucks to delivery stops .
Often a specific time for each job , customer etc. , called a due date , is promised .
Meeting these due dates is very important both for customer satisfaction and economic reasons .
It is well known that these are among the most difficult problems to solve optimally .
Optimal algorithms , which can solve realistically sized problems , will be developed for basic models , e.g .
single processors .
These algorithms will combine mathematical programming with traditional scheduling approaches .
They will then be extended to more complex models such as flow shops .
The algorithms will be computationally tested to verify their efficacy .
These tests will also be used to explore what factors make an instance difficult to solve.The results of this research will lead to improved ability to schedule in both manufacturing and service environments .
The resulting schedules will have better on-time performance as well as reduced costs .
To verify results , one of the algorithms will be incorporated into a larger production control software package being developed for the Tunisian textile industry .
Additionally , the solution methods proposed for these problems should also have application to other difficult combinatorial problems , such as routing , network design and analysis , reliability and project selection .
Proposal Number DMS-0200743PI Evgeny PoletskyABSTRACTThis project proposes the further study of the geometric complex analysis , mostly , through pluri-potential theory.Research will be conducted in the following topicsthe existence of a general potential theory containingall the necessary background ; the complex geometry of infinite-dimensional spaces related to classical problemsfor plurisubharmonic functions ; the complex geometry ofcompact sets via the pluri-potential theory on suchsets ; the geometry of domains and multipole Green functions ( the classical analog is the Martin-Caratheodorycompactification ) and Bernstein-Walsh and Markov inequalities for generalized polynomials .
Other geometricquestions will also be considered.In this project research will be conducted on geometriccomplex analysis .
Geometry , as a part of mathematics , aims to describe qualitative links between different objects .
For example , parallel lines do not meet and theheights in a triangle meet at the same point .
When Euclidean objects points , lines and planes are replacedby more complicated structures functions , surfaces andsets , the research is of a more delicate flavor.It happens because the mechanism providing links betweenobjects is not transparent .
In our proposal we will lookfor such a mechanism in the form of potentials similar tothe energy levels of electrical charges .
Abstract for proposal # 0200225 , Helmut VoelkleinHurwitz spaces parametrize covers of the sphereof given ramification type and monodromy group.Each Hurwitz space has a natural map to the moduli space of genus g curves ( for suitable g ) .
Thishas been used in algebraic geometry for a long time , but only in the case of simple covers ( which in particular have a symmetric group as monodromy group ) .Hurwitz spaces of covers with arbitrary monodromy group were constructed by Fried and Voelklein , and applied to the Inverse Galois problem .
Proposed research explores how the group-theoreticmethods associated with Hurwitz spaces can be applied in the study of the moduli of curves.This includes algorithmic methods of computational group theory , which are especially useful in the study of the braid group action on generatingsystems of a finite group .
Generalizations replace the braid group by the mapping class group of a punctured surface of non-zero genus .
Applicationsto the Inverse Galois Problem are to be expected.The project is partially in cooperation with G. Frey , K. Magaard and S. Shpectorov.Group Theory is the abstract study of symmetry patterns ( of any object ) .
Many algorithms of Group Theoryare implemented in modern computer algebra systems.Proposed research uses these computer algebra systems to find and study families of highly symmetric algebraic curves .
Algebraic curves are basic objectsin mathematics , physics and applications , e.g. , cryptography.Elliptic curve cryptography provides encryption schemesused for data security on the internet .
This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Microbial Biology for FY2002 .
The fellowship supports training and research on the basic biology of protozoan , microalgal , fungal , archaeal , bacterial and viral species that are not generally considered to be model organisms .
Further , it provides opportunities for a recent doctoral recipients to obtain additional training in microbial biology , to gain research experience under the sponsorship of established scientists , and to broaden his/her scientific horizons beyond the research experiences during the undergraduate and graduate training .
These fellowships are further designed to assist new scientists to direct their research efforts across traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves of unique research resources , sites , and facilities , including foreign locations .
The research and training plan is entitled The microbiology of iron reduction in the salt marsh .
This research is investigating the importance of microorganisms that use iron to obtain energy for growth in the salt marsh ecosystem .
Comprehensive geochemical and microbiological laboratory techniques are being used to quantify the contribution of microbial iron respiration to total organic matter decomposition in different salt marsh environments to estimate the importance of iron respiration to carbon cycling on a marsh-wide scale .
The diversity and community structure of iron-reducing microorganisms is being investigated using serial dilution cultures , 16S rRNA based techniques , fluorescent in situ hybridization , and microscopy .
This research could lead to the discovery of new iron-reducing organisms that are important in coastal marine environments .
The September 11,2001 , terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon prompted immediate and longer-term concerns about the nature of vulnerabilities to terrorism and the more general nature of societal responses to environmental , biological , chemical , and terrorist security threats .
As different scientific communities have assessed the new realities revealed by the terrorist attacks and subsequent promulgation of anthrax through the mails , geographers have identified a broad range of ways in which they can contribute to deeper understandings of the causes , consequences , and responses to terrorism .
This Small Grant for Exploratory Research will expand the examination of geographic dimensions of terrorism-related research through two related sets of activities .
First , faculty and students from Hunter College of the City University of New York , the University of Colorado-Denver , and the University of South Carolina will conduct a pilot project to assess the role and utility of geographic information in emergency management and response to the World Trade Center attack .
This pilot study will briefly summarize the knowledge base on the use of geographic technology in hazards response and what has been learned to date .
It will evaluate local experiences in providing spatial data in support of rescue , relief , and recovery efforts ; and it will include a broader survey on the use of geographical technologies during the immediate-response phase for the first three weeks following the disaster .
A combination of web-based sources , media accounts , and personal interviews will be used to gather the necessary data .
The second part of this project will include the conduct of a workshop during late 2001 or early 2002 to formulate a more substantive research agenda on the geographical dimensions of terrorism .
Using the pilot study as a backdrop for discussion , participants identified through their extant research and from submissions evaluated by workshop organizers will develop a general research agenda that provides a clearly focused set of research themes , needs , and tasks .
The agenda will be widely disseminated to the geographic research community and to related disciplines .
The outcomes of the workshop include a published book or article on the material prepared for the workshop , establishment of multi-institutional research collaboratives , and the enhancement of the research infrastructure of the discipline to address important public policy needs and issues.This project will have both immediate and longer-term benefits .
The pilot study will coalesce knowledge about the ways that geographic information technologies were used in response to the September 11 attacks , and it will address wider-ranging issues associated with the anticipation of and responses to cataclysmic events .
Th workshop will provide a forum for the development of a more fully articulated research agenda , and it will be a setting to stimulate dialogue among academic researchers , private-sector practitioners , and federal , state , and local government officials .
The resulting agenda and expanded networks should facilitate the capabilities of geographers to respond to this pressing national concern .
The principal investigator is working in the field ofrepresentation theory of finite groups .
Mainly he studiesquestions related to the conjectures of Alperin , Dade , and Broue.These conjectures state that certain invariants of a finite groupand a fixed prime number can be determined by the same invariantsof subgroups which are again related to that prime .
The firstconjectures are concerned with invariants that are integers , whereas the third conjecture predicts equivalences of categories.The first two conjectures and consequences of the third have beenverified for a convincing number of examples .
It is likely thatthese three conjectures are consequences of a single fact , object , theory , or construction which is still hidden .
Probably moreimportant than solving these particular conjectures would be thediscovery of this hidden feature .
The principal investigator workson general ideas of how to approach these conjectures .
Graduatestudents are involved in this effort by writing computer programswhich will either discard or give more evidence to theapplicability of one of the suggested approaches.The principal investigator studies representations of groups.Groups can be viewed as mathematical abstractions of the notion ofsymmetry .
They are among the most basic notions in many fields ofmathematics and are applied widely , for example in cryptology , physics , chemistry , and computer science .
Representations ofgroups are manifestations of a particular type of symmetry onother mathematical objects , as for example the four rotations andfour reflections , that a square in the plane allows , form arepresentation of a group with 8 elements on a two-dimensionalvector space .
More specifically , the principal investigatorstudies mysterious coincidences in the representation theory offinite groups which have been discovered about fifteen years agobut could not be explained so far .
This research is not aimed atimmediate applications outside mathematics .
However , in thehistory of the interplay between mathematics and other sciences , in particular with physics , it is a repeated pattern that theoriesand results which were considered as important within the edificeof mathematics became precisely what was needed in the othersciences in order to describe our real world .
For example , grouprepresentations which have been studied a century ago became muchlater the right tool to describe particles in nuclear physics .
PI Hans Lindblad , Univ .
of Cal .
San DiegoDMS-0200226AbstractLindblad 's research concerns basic mathematical questions for systems of nonlinear hyperbolic equations in mathematical physics .
These include several important equations in classical field theory and continuum mechanics as well as in classical physics , e.g .
Einstein 's equations in general relativity and the equation of fluids and elastic bodies .
These basic questions are ( i ) Do we have local existence and uniqueness of solutions in a certain class ?
( ii ) Do we have blow-up of solutions ?
( e.g .
black holes in general relativity ) ( iii ) What is the long time behavior of solutions ?
More specifically , Lindblad is mainly working on two projects .
One on proving the well-posedness for a class of problems that occur in fluid dynamics and general relativity , in particular proving the well-posedness for the free boundary problem of the motion of the surface of a fluid in vacuum .
A long term goal is to study the long time behavior of astrophysical bodies such as gaseous stars as well as the surface of the ocean .
Another project is to study global solutions of equations related to Einstein 's equations .
A long term goal is to simplify and generalize the global existence results for Einstein 's equations .
These two problems are related to the question of whether the fundamental equations in physics have global solutions .
Solution to these questions could have important consequences .
For instance , it is conceivable that one could use the knowledge obtained from the solutions of Einstein 's equations to permit the use of gravitational waves to observe the Universe .
Understanding the properties of and controlling the interface between two fluids could have industrial applications .
To solve these problems Lindblad and his collaborators are developing new techniques that could be useful for studying many other problems as well .
In particular , they are using geometric methods to study hyperbolic differential equations .
This project seeks to develop novel nanocomposite foams , based on a combination of nanoparticle technology and supercritical fluids ( SCF ) technology .
With proper design of the nanoparticle type , content , dispersion , an orientation , the solubility of SCF in the polymer matrix , the rheological properties of nanoparticle containing polymer , and nucleation and foam growth mechanism can be tailored to generate a wide spectrum of foams with well-defined pore structure .
They include closed or open cellular structures ; macro , mire , and nano-cellular foams .
The presence of nanoparticles can provide improved mechanical strength and physical properties , such as diffusion barrier and fire retardance , that are essential for many engineering applications .
The large surface area of nanoparticles may also serve as templates for added functions to the polymer foams .
Examples are bioactive molecules such as growth factors to facilitate cell growth in tissue engineering , an electric or magnetic conductive molecules for EMI shielding.This project decribes a scientific effort at developing environmentally benign technology in direct response to regulatory action .
In order to remain viable and compete in the construction industry of the twenty-first century , industries producing polymeric foam products have no choice but to operate in an ecologically conscious manner .
Education impact and recruitment of underrepresented minorities is addressed through collaboration between the Center for Advanced Polymer and Composite Engineering at The Ohio State University and Florida A & M University - FSU .
By combining expertise in foam production from industry with thermodynamics , rheology , and polymer processing in academia , this project demonstrates the potential for rapid development of this alternative blowing agent .
Abstract-0200449Robert R. Bitmead , U. of Cal-San DiegoNonlinear System Identification with Application to Combustion Instabillty ControlRobert R Bitmead , Department of Mechanical & Aerospace Engineering , U of California-San Diego.System Identification is the science of fitting mathematical dynamical models using measured data from experiments together with candidate model structures from physical reasoning .
Identification is critical in developing models of complex and imprecisely known systems prior to their analysis .
This project is concerned with developing techniques and underpinning theories for nonlinear system identification .
At present there is a dearth of tools and guidance of how to proceed in this case .
While the focus is scientific and broad , the study will proceed by considering in tandem with theory a major driving application of combustion instability control , of interest in jet engines and gas power turbines.The project has phases in which general concepts are developed and then are explored in the context of the combustion instabilities .
Developing suitable measures of fit and then tests of confidence of models will be early goals .
These should capture the important features in the data records from the nonlinear oscillating system while ignoring the unimportant detail .
Here tests can be made with models already fitted to the data .
Specifically nonlinear tools such as bifurcation analysis then can be applied for the assessment of model properties which are preserved from experiment to experiment and which might form the basis of control design.Chief among the theoretical tasks is to address the concept of model validation for such systems as oscillators .
That is , how might one develop an experiment , which is capable of revealing the weaknesses of a particular candidate model fitted using some criterion .
This is intimately connected with confidence in the identified model and with uncertainty in its suitability for a use .
Should generalized concepts and meaningful tests be developed , there is a ready market for the application of these tools .
Indeed , nonlinear control design has moved forward greatly recently in theory and practice , but it needs good models of known reliability to go much further .
Procedural synthesis of natural and contextually appropriate gestures in embodied virtual human agents is challenging .
Laban Movement Analysis ( LMA ) offers a descriptive system for human gesture qualities that fills the gap between pre-defined gesture playback systems and human animator intuition .
A computational analog of LMA called EMOTE has been constructed whose parameters modify the performance qualities of arm gesture movements .
EMOTE will be developed in several new ways* Connect EMOTE with an agent model so that an agent 's affect , personality , and communicative needs set appropriate EMOTE parameters for gesture performance .
* Investigate motion analysis techniques for extracting EMOTE parameters from live dual or single camera views .
* Experimentally validate the automated acquisition of EMOTE parameters by using professional LMA notators for ground truth .
* Use the extracted parameters to create instances of parameterized actions which may be subsequently used for action , affect , and manner descriptions and , ultimately , for content-directed analysis of existing film or video material.This study will help set synthetic agent animation techniques on a sound empirical footing , provide evidence that computers can in fact observe important motion qualities , and lead to strong connections between internal agent state and external behavior qualities .
The investigator will continue his work on the interplay betweenprobability and algorithms .
He has identified two distinct but very important aspects of such study .
In the first instance he will study randomized algorithms i.e .
those algorithms that introduce randomnessas a means of speeding up computation .
In the second instance , he will consider the average case performance of algorithms .
Here , he wants to tryto explain the good performance of simple algorithms on typical problems as opposed to the worst-case performance exemplified by the pathological examples of complexity theory.In the area of randomized algorithms , the investigator will considerproblems arising in the study of Monte Carlo Markov Chain algorithms.In particular he will study their use in problems associated with combinatorial counting problems and with problems in Statistical Physics .
He will also continue his study of the Edge Disjoint Path problem and the construction of a generalisation of the well knownmatrix Singular Value Decomposition to multi-dimensional matrices .
In the area of average case analysis , he will continue his work on theTraveling Salesman Problem and try to extend his ideas to the independent symmetric model .
He will continue his work on analysing the efficacy of the Sequencing By Hybridization technique in ComputationalBiology .
Finally , he will continue to work on probabilistic models of theWorld Wide Web in an attempt to find a useful model for the testing of algorithmic ideas .
The theory of special values of L-functions is a major , active area ofresearch within the general fields of number theory and arithmeticalgebraic geometry .
Stark 's Main Conjecture provides a link betweenspecial values of Artin L-functions and the arithmetic of the associatedGalois extensions .
In recent years , Rubin and Popescu have formulatedrefined , integral versions of Stark 's Main Conjecture in the case ofabelian L-functions of arbitrary order of vanishing at the origin .
Also , Burns and Flach , by reworking earlier conjectures of Bloch-Kato andFontaine-Perrin Riou , have formulated the Equivariant Tamagawa NumberConjecture for certain classes of motivic L-functions .
If restricted tothe case of Artin L-functions , the Burns-Flach conjecture can also beviewed as a refined , integral version of Stark 's Main Conjecture .
ThePrincipal Investigator focuses on providing evidence for , studying thefunctorial behavior of , and finding links between the Conjectures ofRubin , Popescu , and Burns-Flach .
He also works on developingGross-type p-adic refinements of these statements , as well as buildingbridges between these statements and the Theory of Euler Systems , Equivariant Iwasawa Theory , and the Conjectures of Brumer , Leopoldt , andChinburg.The L-functions are mathematical objects of analytic ( continuous ) nature , encoding an enormous amount of extremely interesting and usefulinformation of arithmetic ( discrete ) nature .
The main goal of thisproject is to continue a program initiated by Stark , Rubin , the principalinvestigator , and Burns-Flach , and develop general recipes ( conjectures ) aimed at retrieving the arithmetic data encoded in a special type ofL-functions ( the Artin L-functions ) , and follow these recipes ( in otherwords prove these conjectures ) in several important special cases .
Inparallel , the Principal Investigator is developing links between theseconjectures and other , already developed theories , dealing with objects ofarithmetic ( discrete ) nature , such as the theory of Euler Systems andEquivariant Iwasawa Theory .
Aside from its importance for the centralareas of pure mathematics called number theory and arithmetic algebraicgeometry , this research could have far reaching practical applications tothe development of new data encryption algorithms .
This award renews support for maintenance of a collection of prosimian primates housed at the Duke University Primate Center ( DUPC ) .
Study of the biology and behavior of Prosimians continues to increase in scope , intensity , and sophistication , and it is now one of the most active and exciting fields of primatology .
The DUPC houses the largest and most diverse collection of prosimian primates in the world , most of whom are native to Madagascar .
The Center is recognized as the focal point for prosimian research and conservation activities outside Madagascar .
As part of its research mission , the DUPC provides on-site access to animals , and ships tissues and blood samples to faculty and students from diverse local , regional , national , and foreign institutions for off-site use .
Users are charged a fee scaled to the kind and quantity of usage .
This award insures the continued availability of animals and tissues for use by outside researchers at relatively modest cost .
CMS-0201482PI Joseph DoveInstitution Virginia Polytechnic and State UniversityTitle New Design Criteria for Soil and Construction Material Interface Systems AbstractCentral to many facets of geotechnical engineering design is the problem of determining how local interactions between soil materials and manufactured inclusions dictate overall behavior of a geotechnical composite system .
Whether the inclusion is geosynthetic , steel , concrete , or a new material yet to be developed , the interactions between soil and construction materials are governed by underlying physical principles related to measurable properties .
Unfortunately , there are few , if any , predictive relationships for interface systems available to the research and practice communities .
This deficiency is important because innovative applications are arising which require close control over interface resistance .
The goals of this project are to 1 ) Formulate new practical design methods and tools for interface systems ; 2 ) Quantify the micro-mechanical behavior of soil-construction material interfaces in two- and three-dimensions ; and 3 ) Determine the spatial scales that control behavior of interfaces for a given soil material and inclusion geometry .
Results from previous NSF-sponsored research , a laboratory testing program , and two and three-dimensional discrete element micromechanical models will be used to accomplish these goals .
Specific issues to be addressed in the experiments and modeling include the role of grain shape ; surface topography ; relative hardness ; particle movements with respect to the surface asperities ; particle breakage ; and , solid surface wear on the strength and dilatancy of the soil within the interface shear zone.Broader impacts of this research will be realized in five primary impact areas integration of education and research ; participation of minorities and women ; enhancing infrastructure for research ; rapid and broad dissemination of research results ; and , societal benefits .
Education and research will be integrated by bringing research results and new materials into undergraduate and graduate courses .
The PIs will continue their long-standing practice of involving undergraduate students in research through the REU program .
Participation of underrepresented minorities and women is encouraged .
The Ph.D. student involved in this project will serve as a model for her fellow women graduate and undergraduate student colleauges .
McNair Scholars , especially those from the Appalachian region , will be actively recruited to conduct their summer internship on this project , and as graduate students .
The three-dimensional models and algorithms produced will enhance the research and teaching infrastructure by providing advanced computing resources for solving problems in soil/structure interaction .
In addition , project findings will be widely disseminated in print and web-based media .
A surface profile database will be created in downloable format on the world wide web .
Finally , society at large will benefit from cost saving opportunities and technological advancement .
Optical buffering is essential to optical packet switch implementations which have been proposed worldwide to overcome future problems with large electronic packet switches .
We propose to design and fabricate semiconductor-based optical buffers by using sampled gratings , Moir gratings , and chirped Moir gratings .
These gratings will be fabricated using a new method to obtain a photonic bandgap-engineered material that has a large index contrast , which is essential for group velocity reduction in our proposed gratings .
Optical fiber delay lines have been commonly used in recent years in the design of optical buffers , typically through a fiber loop with standard components such as optical isolators , 3-dB couplers , and semiconductor laser amplifiers for the gating , interconnection , and signal amplification .
The fundamental difficulty facing the design of an optical buffer is that variable-length buffers must be implemented with delay lines ; however , by their nature , fiber loop optical delay lines are of fixed length .
Our proposed optical buffer , unlike fiber loop delay lines , is variable by using current injection .
Another significant advantage is that other semiconductor optoelectronic and optical devices can be integrated with our proposed variable optical buffers since they are based on the same semiconductor III-V compounds .
Our proposed tasks include the design and fabrication of sampled gratings , Moir gratings , and chirped Moir gratings as slow-wave devices .
The wavelength range for our proposed devices will be centered at 1.5-1.6 micron wavelength .
Sampled gratings and Moir gratings can be shown to have a large group delay factor when a large contrast in the refractive index is introduced .
This large refractive index contrast will be achieved using our proposed semiconductor and oxide materials .
This contrast is at least two orders of magnitude larger than that of the fiber gratings .
A chirped Moir grating allows for a broader bandwidth for the pass band .
A novel photonic bandgap structure will be fabricated using periodic buried AlOx channels with growth on a patterned substrate .
The advantages of this structure include tight optical and electrical confinement with very low defect densities .
One or multiple current sources can be applied to the gratings via the doped AlGaAs layer to change the refractive index in the slow-wave structures for controlling the buffer delay .
Our research will lead to the realization of a new class of semiconductor optical buffers , which can be immediately integrated with many optoelectronic devices .
PI Maciej R. Zworski , UC-Berkeley .
DMS-0200732AbstractThe main interest of the PI is the study of quantum mechanics from themathematical point of view , and of its many manifestations in the theoryof partial differential equations and geometry .
Specific current interests are the classical/quantum correspondence , resonances , geometric scattering , andnon-hermitian quantum mechanics .
More precisely , the PI is interested in resonances , which are mathematical objects modeling states which have certain frequencies of oscillations ( or rest energies ) and rates of decay , such as unstable molecules or classical system responding to resonant forcing terms .
Despite a long tradition and a lot of recent progress our understanding is still very limited .
Current experimentaland numerical advances provide new stimuli for our studies .
Another interest of the PI isnon-hermitian quantum mechanics , which deals with systems in which energy is not conserved.That is almost always present when we localize a part of a system and the global conservation of energy disapears .
In a subtle way resonances already fall into this category of phenomena .
The mathematical problems present here are the stability of eigenvalues and measuring the size of the resolvent of non-self-adjoint operators .
That leads to the study of `` pseudospectra '' which is then related to many interesting phenomena in PDEs .
Finally , the PI 's interest involves mathematical scattering .
It replaces spectral theory for problems on non-compact domains , and in physics almost all the data comes from scattering experiments .
Many new things are constantly discovered now , ranging from scattering on locally symmetric spaces to problemsrelated to conformal field theory.Many of the phenomena discussed in this proposal are in fact more general for instance , electromagnetic scattering can be used to model quantum scattering , and its understandingcan benefit from the development of the classical/quantum correspondence.The PI 's work focuses on the search for general mathematical principles , and the detailed study of specific examples is motivated by that .
A large number of the technologically useful , unusual , and exciting superhard and superstrong materials such as diamond , carbon nanotubes , and SiC are derived from carbon by covalent bonding of C to itself , and with other elements such as N , B , and Si .
There are an important class of amorphous , partially amorphous , and nano-crystalline materials such as diamond like carbon and highly tetrahedral amorphous carbon with unusual properties .
It has been shown that the amorphous phase plays an important role in the nucleation and growth of diamond and cubic-BN upon non-equilibrium processing .
The primary objectives of this focussed research group will be to ( 1 ) synthesize unusual C-based covalently-bonded amorphous and nano-crystalline materials with controlled nano-structures and properties in the focussed region of the ternary ( C-B-N ) system , ( 2 ) develop/apply advanced techniques to characterize the nano-structures of these materials , and ( 3 ) relate the scale of the nano-structure and connectivity of the amorphous network to the selected properties .
With this vision in mind , the premise of the proposed FRG is that the functionality/property of nano-structured materials in the form of thin films and coatings can be designed by employing a suitable nanoscale architecture and distribution of the basic structural building blocks to control the properties .
In this FRG , Prof. Kleebe at the CO School of Mines will collaborate with researchers at the University of Cincinnati ( Profs .
Singh and Boolchand ) in the designing of nano-structured thin films that goes beyond just refining the polycrystalline microstructural scale , to exploring the amorphous routes for synthesizing , characterizing , and controlling the nano-structure of new materials in order to achieve unusual mechanical , physical , thermal , and possibly other properties .
Thus , materials will be first designed and synthesized/produced to have only short-range order and then nano-structured thin films will be created by clever modifications of the non-equilibrium processing methods , and kinetic/thermal manipulation of the networks/nanostructues to create nano-crystalline thin films .
The eventual aim of these activities will be to develop predictive tools for designing and synthesizing materials with unusual properties so that a knowledge base for creating materials by design will be obtained .
On a broader scale , a successful completion of this research will lead to a knowledge base for designing nano-structured materials in C-B-N ternary with unusual mechanical and physical properties for applications in machining , electronic devices , MEMS , and functional/protective coatings .
In particular , the scientific understanding of the role of the nano-scale structure , microstructure , and interfacial materials in creating novel materials will be obtained .
Graduate and undergraduate students and research associate/post doc will be trained through participation on this research project and their theses .
A new course on Plasma Processing of Thin Films will be developed and taught to undergraduate and graduate students .
In addition , minority/women high school students will be mentored and exposed to this research through NASA-SHARP program at University of Cincinnati .
The rapid expansion of global communications has placed increased requirements on optical fiber infrastructure and has stimulated the demand for increased system capacity .
As a result , high data rate , dense wavelength-division-multiplexed ( WDM ) systems are being widely deployed in long-haul terrestrial and trans-oceanic links .
In these systems , polarization effects can severely limit the performance of the system .
System designers commonly allocate a prescribed power penalty margin to polarization effects say 2 dB .
An outage is said to occur when this margin is exceeded .
A common constraint is to limit outage to a probability of 10-6 .
Because outages are rare events , it is difficult to quantify their probability of occurrence either theoretically or experimentally .
In the past year , we have achieved a theoretical breakthrough by the use of importance sampling , which allows us to accurately quantify rare events .
We both extend this technique theoretically and apply it for the first time experimentally .
Our focus is on determining the causes of outage and , from that , effective mitigation techniques .
The proposed research is based on a close experimental and theoretical cooperation to study the issue of channel outage due to polarization effects in long haul , high data-rate , terrestrial WDM transmission systems .
A series of experiments will be carried out and theoretically modeled to study the interactions of polarization effects with nonlinearity , chromatic dispersion , and amplified spontaneous emission noise , and to assess the impact these combined effects have on channel outage for both RZ and NRZ formatted data .
We will experimentally determine the region of validity of a reduced model that only follows the Stokes parameters in a WDM system , rather than the full time-domain behavior .
We have already validated this model in simulations .
Other modeling tools will be developed and validated as needed to accurately and efficiently calculate the channel outage probability due to polarization effects .
This project has three parts ( 1 ) To study the versal deformations of A_\infty , L_\infty algebras , which are generalizations of Lie and associative algebras ; ( 2 ) To study the problem of deformation quantization of polynomial Poisson algebras ; ( 3 ) To address some problems in the study of the moduli space of Riemann surfaces with marked points that arise from the combinatorial equivalence of this space and the orbifold of metric Ribbon graphs .
The first part continues a program being carried out jointly with Alice Fialowski .
The second part is about generalizing a purely cohomological construction of the PI and Pol Vanhaecke of the unique generic deformation quantizationof order three which extends to a fourth order deformation .
The third part , which is joint work with Motohico Mulase , is more open-ended .
Reasonable goals might be to establish a canonical orbifold diffeomorphism between the moduli space of Riemann surfaces and the Ribbon graph complex ; to give concrete characterizations of the Strebel differential in some interesting cases ; to study solutions to the KP system determined by the correspondence between ribbon graphs and Riemann surfaces over the algebraic closure of the rationals ; to describe in detail the correspondence between the homology of the Ribbon graph comples , and the moduli space of Riemann surfaces with marked points.This project consists of three problems in mathematics related to or motivated by physics .
The first problem is to study what happens when a very general kind of algebraic structure , one that arises in both mathematics and physics , is deformed , for example by incorporating some special little twisting process into the usual algebraic operation of multiplication .
This investigation continues collaborative work with a colleague in Hungary .
The second problem involves a different kind of deformation process applied to a certain class of polynomial algebras .
The third , and most open-ended problem , is about investigating a remarkable and unexpected correspondence between an algebraically defined geometric space and a differentially ( as in calculus ) defined geometric object .
This third part also provides numerous opportunities for undergraduate involvement in research .
Our objective in this proposal is to explore the use of the spatial and temporal dispersion characteristics of photonic crystals and related structures for optical communication applications .
Photonic crystals are artificial microstructures where the index of refraction is strongly modulated at a length scale comparable to the wavelength .
They provide a new mechanism for the manipulation of light .
In particular , several unique characteristics of photonic crystals make them a particularly intriguing material system for novel components in optical communication systems .
The crystals exhibit strong spatial dispersion characteristics .
These characteristics have been exploited in the super-prism effect .
The crystals also possess large temporal dispersion effects , such as large group delay , strong chromatic dispersion , and significant polarization dependency .
Thus , photonic crystals may hold tremendous potential in performing some of the critical functionality in optical communications , such as tunable optical delay , dynamic dispersion compensation and mitigation , and wavelength division multiplexing and demultiplexing .
To realize the potentials of photonic crystals , however , it is critically important to understand how photonic crystal structures can be engineered to meet the stringent requirements of optical communications .
For example , a fundamental challenge for high bit rate applications is to achieve significant dispersive effects with a large enough bandwidth that is sufficient to cover the signal of interest .
For wavelength division multiplexing , for example , it is important to provide sufficiently low dispersion constant over the wavelength range of interest .
Understanding how to go about designing such structures will require a deeper understanding of device principles that could give such behaviors.We therefore propose to undertake a project that will systematically examine some of the fundamental dispersive properties of photonic crystals and related structures , in the context of optical communication applications .
The proposed activities will be theoretical and computational in their nature .
A key objective here , however , is to produce designs of novel and functional structures that are experimentally feasible , and to answer questions that are of immediate experimental relevance and importance .
In doing so we seek to directly impact wide ranges of experimental efforts that are already ongoing in this emerging area of photonic crystal technology .
The recent increase in demand for information bandwidth has created the need for improving current technologies for data , voice and video transmission .
The telecommunications industry has increasingly emphasized the development of fiberoptic networks to meet this demand .
One key to creating this infrastructure is the production of economical fiberoptic components , such as wave guides and Bragg gratings .
Current manufacturing techniques for optical components and fiber preforms are limited to vapor deposition techniques and photolithographic processes .
This research is to advance the field of optical component manufacturing through innovative direct-write processing .
Our goal is to develop a novel manufacturing process based on laser sintering of materials produced from sol-gel processing techniques .
Research tasks include ( 1 ) characterizating the chemistry and processing of sol-gels ; ( 2 ) design , construction , and testing of a workstation for combined sol-gel preparation and laser densification of multi-layer optical components ; ( 3 ) developing a real time controller for the workstation ; and ( 4 ) fabricating three-dimensional optical components to demonstrate the process .
We expect fundamental science-based results in the areas of unique sol-gel materials and chemistry , repeatability of sol-gel processing , materials characterization , models for optical property control , machine design of sol-gel deposition and densification , and laser processing methods for micron and sub-micron materials .
We also expect overall deliverables of a repeatable direct-write process and example 3D optical components .
Collaboration with an industrial partner , 3M Corporation , will provide fundamental understanding of the industry needs and capabilities , leading to a higher potential for future commercialization .
These unique research experiences will provide direct educational benefits to both graduate and undergraduate students in systems design engineering and optical product realization.We believe our approach will lead to innovative optical component designs , not producible by current vapor deposition techniques .
These components will provide higher performance and enable the telecommunications industry to better meet the needs of society .
PI Brian C. Hall , University of Notre DameDMS-0200649AbstractThe PI 's research concerns the quantization of certainspecial classical systems , those whose classical configurationspace is a compact symmetric space , such as a sphere .
Thesimplest physical example of such a system is ( the rotationaldegrees of freedom of ) a rigid body , whose configuration space isthe rotation group SO ( 3 ) .
The phase space of any such system , namely , the cotangent bundle of the compact symmetric space , hasa natural complex structure that makes the phase space into aKahler manifold .
Thus the quantization of such a system can bedone in two ways , one using the usual position Hilbert space andthe other using a Hilbert space of holomorphic functions .
Thelatter space generalizes the classical Segal-Bargmann space .
Thetwo possible quantum Hilbert spaces are related by a unitarytransform , the generalized Segal-Bargmann transform , developed bythe PI and M. Stenzel .
The unitarity of this transform can bere-formulated as a resolution of the identity for the associatedcoherent states , as shown in detail by the PI and J. Mitchell.These results have been applied to the quantization oftwo-dimensional Yang-Mills theory and to the classical limit ofThiemann 's quantum gravity theory .
The PI is continuing toinvestigate several aspects of the theory , including thesemiclassical localization properties of the coherent states , properties of the associated quantization schemes ( generalizedWick , anti-Wick , and Weyl quantizations ) , and the relationship ofthe theory to geometric quantization .
Broadly speaking the PI 's research is in the boundaryregion between classical and quantum mechanics .
Quantum mechanicsis the theory that governs the world at the atomic scale.Although classical ( Newtonian ) mechanics works well formacroscopic phenomena , it can not account for the structure ofatoms and molecules -- at this level the quantum theory takes over.For the two theories to be consistent with one another thepredictions of quantum mechanics must pass smoothly into those ofclassical mechanics as the scale passes from microscopic tomacroscopic .
On the other hand , the mathematical structure of thetwo theories is very different , so it is challenging tounderstand how this quantum-to-classical transition takes place.The PI 's research concerns a reformulation of quantum mechanicswhich is equivalent to the usual one but which brings thedescription of quantum mechanics closer to that of classicalmechanics .
Specifically , the PI 's work takes one standardreformulation of quantum mechanics , the Segal-Bargmann transform , and extends it to apply to systems with more complicated degreesof freedom , such as rotations .
This work has been applied in asimplified model of the strong interaction in particle physicsand in an ambitious program of T. Thiemann and collaborators todevelop a quantum theory of gravity .
In this project we focus on the class of capacity planning and resource allocation problems in which customers view waiting times as one of their major concerns .
The objective is to develop a methodology for joint optimal capacity planning and demand allocation for such problems .
An important phase in this project is to develop an understanding of customer reactions to capacity allocation rules .
The project will be conducted through the following steps ( i ) Develop mathematical models for the joint capacity planning and demand allocation problem .
( ii ) Determine structural properties of the main sub-components of the problem , viz. , capacity planning and demand allocation , including customer 's individual optimization for any given capacity allocation .
( iii ) Develop optimal combined capacity planning and demand allocation algorithms for use in diverse settings .
The expected output of this project includes theoretical insight as well as algorithms for capacity planning and demand allocation in dynamic environments that will be of use to manufacturing managers , supply chain managers , distribution systems planners , and service operations managers.Growing global competition and rapid changes in information technology are forcing companies to pay more attention to customer needs and system responsiveness ; service delivery has become a key factor in improving a company 's competitive position .
Many US companies have expanded both nationally and internationally not only to take advantage of tariff , labor and other incentives but also to provide better customer service .
These firms , both manufacturing and service , operate over a wide-spread geographic area and face a dynamic environment in which there are random changes in demand within and across geographic boundaries .
However , capacity planning alone will not guarantee success in such global diversification ventures .
In most realistic situations , even though customers can be served by any one of many regional facilities , some customers may have a natural affinity for being served at a specific facility because of time or cost considerations .
On the other hand , as the capacity at one location is expanded , more customers are attracted from other regions to this location for service .
The overall effect of these inter-region flows can deteriorate the performance at some facilities while other facilities remain underutilized .
This project develops methodologies and understanding for these capacity allocation problems by taking into consideration how customers react to the firm 's allocation decisions.Growing global competition and rapid changes in information technology are forcing companies to pay more attention to customer needs and system responsiveness ; service delivery has become a key factor in improving a company 's competitive position .
Many US companies have expanded both nationally and internationally not only to take advantage of tariff , labor and other incentives but also to provide better customer service .
These firms , both manufacturing and service , operate over a wide-spread geographic area and face a dynamic environment in which there are random changes in demand within and across geographic boundaries .
However , capacity planning alone will not guarantee success in such global diversification ventures .
In most realistic situations , even though customers can be served by any one of many regional facilities , some customers may have a natural affinity for being served at a specific facility because of time or cost considerations .
On the other hand , as the capacity at one location is expanded , more customers are attracted from other regions to this location for service .
The overall effect of these inter-region flows can deteriorate the performance at some facilities while other facilities remain underutilized .
This project develops methodologies and understanding for these capacity allocation problems by taking into consideration how customers react to the firm 's allocation decisions .
This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Microbial Biology for FY2002 .
The fellowship supports training and research on the basic biology of protozoan , microalgal , fungal , archaeal , bacterial and viral species that are not generally considered to be model organisms .
Further , it provides opportunities for a recent doctoral recipients to obtain additional training in microbial biology , to gain research experience under the sponsorship of established scientists , and to broaden his/her scientific horizons beyond the research experiences during the undergraduate and graduate training .
These fellowships are further designed to assist new scientists to direct their research efforts across traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves of unique research resources , sites , and facilities , including foreign locations .
The research and training plan is entitled Molecular characterization of microbial respiratory arsenate reduction diversity and environmental expression of metalloid reductase genes .
Microbial respiratory arsenate reduction can significantly alter the mobility and toxicity of arsenic in the environment .
Little is known about the molecular mechanisms for arsenic respiration .
The research goals of this research are to identify genes involved in arsenate respiration in a variety of species , including Sulfurospirillum and Shewanella strains , and measure arsenate respiratory activity in contaminated sites .
PI Sagun Chanillo , Rutgers UniversityDMS-0200628AbstractIn this proposal several problems are proposed , all in the field ofPDE .
Most of these problems are in the sub-field of non-linearPDE , and some in linear PDE .
The non-linear problemsarise naturally from Physics andGeometry and the interaction of Physics and Geometry .
The linear problems are also tied in withGeometry and Physics .
Thereis a strong focus in this proposal on various qualitativefeatures of solutions to PDE , their level lines , nodal linesof eigenfunctions , smoothness of solutions and so on .
We have selected the problems in part because we view many of them as having very natural connections with classical Harmonic analysis , and in fact we have made some start on solving them using techniques from classical Harmonic analysis .
This is described in the body of the proposal .
Some of the problems that arise from Physics in our proposal are connected with the phenomena ofvortices .
Here we continue work that was funded by previous grants.The vortices we study are those that arise from fluid flow ontwo-dimensional spheres and on the plane .
Taking the continuum limit of the point vortex distribution leads us to a new technique for solving the prescribed Gauss curvature equation which also gives a tremendous insight into conformally invariant PDE 's .
Problems are also posedthat stem from the Schrodinger equation and Geometry and itsinfluence on the spectrum of elliptic operators.We single out an important component of the proposed researchproposal .
In todays environment it has become important tostudy so-called smart materials , more principally composites.Because of their lightness they are preferred materialsto use for their strength and lightness .
In this proposalwe study as one problem the vibrational characteristicsof composites .
In particular how should one build objects usingcomposite materials so as to minimize their basic vibrational characteristics.Intuitively the larger the natural frequency with whichan object vibrates , the more it is susceptible to stressand breakage .
For example one question one can ask is , if we need to build a symmetric object like a washer does itmean the composite has to be arranged symmetrically respectingthe symmetry of the washer ?
We find that in our research for example thatthis necessarily does not minimize the stresses that can be caused by vibrationand we need to arrange the composite in a non-symmetric wayto construct the washer .
This is not the only problem we study in ourproposal but also problems in Differential Geometry and Physics .
0200970Ding The long-term goal of this project is to develop statistical methods and software for improved prediction of RNA secondary structure , and for improved computational design of antisense oligonucleotides ( oligos ) and trans-cleaving ribozymes as the vehicles for high-throughput functional genomics and drug target validation in the post-genomic era .
The objectives of the project include 1 ) development of statistical algorithms and methodology for the rational design of antisense oligos and ribozymes ; 2 ) experimental testing and improvement of antisense design method with experimental feedback data ; 3 ) development of a statistical RNA folding software Sfold for RNA folding prediction and design of antisense oligos and ribozymes ; and establishment and maintenance of a Sfold Web server for RNA folding and antisense oligo and ribozyme design .
The Web server will be freely accessible by the scientific community for non-commercial applications .
Of the estimated 30,000-40,000 genes in the human genome , definitive functions have been assigned to only a few percent .
Through gene down-regulation , antisense oligos and ribozymes are important tools for the assignment of gene functions and for the validation of human therapeutic targets .
There is compelling experimental evidence that the accessibility of the messenger or viral RNA by antisense oligos or ribozymes is most constrained by the secondary structure of the target .
Recently , statistical approaches to the prediction of RNA secondary structure and antisense targets have shown promise and advantages over established methods .
It is thus important to explore fully the advantages of statistical approaches to RNA folding prediction and antisense oligo and ribozyme design .
It is expected that the methods and software developed from this project will be widely used for functional genomics applications .
This grant is made under the Joint DMS/NIGMS Initiative to Support Research Grants in the Area of Mathematical Biology .
This is a joint competition sponsored by the Division of Mathematical Sciences ( DMS ) at the National Science Foundation and the National Institute of General Medical Sciences ( NIGMS ) at the National Institutes of Health .
The principal investigator intends to apply model-theoreticmethods to the representation theory of Lie algebras andnoncommutative rings , as well as to the K-theory of a pointedabelian category .
One of the main goals of the project will beto generalize classical results about finite-dimensionalrepresentations to the pseudo-finite dimensional case - arepresentation of an algebra is called pseudo-finite dimensionalif it satisfies the axioms for a finite-dimensionalrepresentation .
A theory of pseudo-finite dimensionalrepresentations has already been introduced for the Lie algebrasl ( 2 , k ) , and the project is devoted to generalizing this theoryfor the case of a finite-dimensional semisimple Lie algebra L , as well as the corresponding Lie group G ( L ) .
The project willalso focus on the complex of positive-primitive formulae in thelanguage of modules over an associative ring R. The aim will beto establish a relationship between the homology of this complexand the K-theory of the free abelian category over R.Symmetry plays an essential role in the study of physical objectsthat occur in Nature .
The symmetries of an object - think , forexample , of a crystal or a butterfly - are the rigid motions thatbring the object back onto itself .
These symmetries form analgebraic structure , called a group .
In this way , we canassociate to every physical object its group of symmetries .
Inrepresentation theory , the mathematician considers a group G asan abstract object and attempts to classify all the objects ofwhich G is the symmetry group .
Traditionally , research hasfocused on the case where the objects are finite-dimensionalvector spaces .
In this project , the methods of mathematical logicare applied to include the infinite-dimensional cases calledpseudo-finite dimensional .
These are the situations that thelimited power of expression of the mathematical language in usecannot distinguish from the finite-dimensional .
It has been shownthat many such objects exist , but to unlock the secrets behindany particular one of them remains a baffling question .
Abstract for DMS-0200690William B. Johnson and Gilles Pisier , PIsThe principal investigators will investigate problems in the theories of Banach spaces and operator spaces .
The problems to be considered fall into several subcategories ; namely , affine approximation of Lipschitz functions , non linearinfinite dimensional and finite dimensional geometry , finite dimensional subspaces of Lebesgue spaces , measures on infinite dimensional spaces , similarity theory , tensor products of operator spaces , bounded and completely bounded approximation properties , and amenability of spaces of operators .
There will be coordination of the proposed project with the existing Workshop in Linear Analysis and Probability Theory at Texas A & M University .
This Workshop encourages interactions among researchers and apprentices in different mathematical fields by bringing together graduate students , young investigators , and junior and senior postdoctoral participants in several areas of analysis .
Banach space theory , the study of notions of distance which are not necessarily Euclidean on both finite and infinite dimensional vector spaces , forms the basis for both Euclidean and non-Euclidean geometry and the analytic geometry of infinite dimensional function spaces , including the space of continuous numerical functions on an interval as well as more complicated classes of functions .
From the beginning , the ideas at the root of Quantum Mechanics have had a major impact on mathematics , stimulating the study of operators and their spectrum instead of numerical functions .
These ideas have led recently to the new field of Quantized Functional Analysis or Operator Space Theory and this development has led to the solution of several major problems as well as opened new avenues of research .
Analogously , the non linear geometry of Banach spaces also is a rather recent development which is beginning to have considerable impact in geometrical analysis in both the finite and infinite dimensional settings .
This project applies adaptive optics and laser interferometry to the sensing of bound analytes on an optical compact disk .
The compact disk contains spots of antibodies ( for immunological and proteomic biosensors ) or complementary DNA ( for genomic biosensors ) arranged in concentric tracks .
After exposure to a sample containing multiple analytes , the laser scans a single track at a time with sampling speeds up to one megasample per second .
Bound analytes on the spinning disk modulate the phase of the reflected laser light up to a Megahertz .
This phase is measured using homodyne detection in an adaptive interferometer .
The key element to the interferometer is an adaptive holographic grating ( a semi-insulating GaAs heterostructure ) that mixes the signal ( carrying the phase modulation ) with a reference beam ( local oscillator ) .
The adaptive mixer is insensitive to the problems of laser speckle and mechanical vibrations that have previously prevented the use of sensitive interferometry in this application.The disk will be fabricated using soft lithography and ink-pad stamping .
An important goal of the research is to study multi-analyte up-scaling from a few up to thousands of different analyzer tracks on the disk .
The long-range goal of this research would be to ultimately assay almost every blood protein in a single 10 p1 sample without the need for analyte amplification.For the same reason that shot-noise-limited interferometers can detect sub-picometer surface displacements , this Biosensor CD can detect approximately 300 bound analyte molecules per spot per track .
Such sensitivity can only be achieved by combining the high sampling rate of the spinning disk with the high sensitivity of adaptive interferometry .
The experimental program presented here , if successful , would represent a significant improvement in the ability of biosensors to detect many low-concentration analytes .
This research is on the Theory of Symmetric Functions and its applications to Representation Theory and Combinatorics .
The connection between Representation Theory and the Theory of Symmetric Functions is provided by the Frobenius map which relates group characters to symmetric functions .
Combinatorics plays a role in that multiplicities of irreducibles are often obtained by counting tableaux , paths , trees and a growing variety of newly emerging discrete structures .
In the more than ten years since its discovery , the Macdonald basis has progressively emerged as a central element in these connections .
For more than a decade of research in the Theory of Macdonald Polynomials , the investigator and M. Haiman have been led to a variety of conjectures in Representation Theory , Algebraic Geometry , Combinatorics and Symmetric Function Theory .
Efforts in proving these conjectures have yielded fundamental facts and methods in each of these areas .
More recently the investigator discovered a variety of summation formulas ( PNAS V. 98 ( April 2001 ) 4313-4316 ) which permitted the proof of the first significant positivity result in the Theory of Macdonald Polynomials .
In joint work with J. Haglund the investigator proved a beautiful combinatorial formula ( conjectured by J. Haglund ) for a rational function which had come to be known as the $ q , t $ -Catalan .
The investigator in collaboration with students and associates plans to use his recently discovered symmetric function identities for a direct attack of some of the conjectures that are still unresolved.The Theory of Symmetric Functions is a powerful symbolic manipulation tool .
The reason for this is that non linear problems may often be linearized by the introduction of an infinite number of variables .
Now it develops that the change of bases matrices of Symmetric Function Theory may be used to mimic the presence of infinities within a finite device , thereby permitting the linearization and solution of many a computational problem .
Discoveries in the theory and applications of symmetric functions , should also turn out to be of significant impact in the various areas of mathematics in which symmetric function methods have been shown to be effective .
This given , we can see how important it is to pursue investigations in the Theory of Symmetric functions that extend and deepen the computational power of the theory .
This is the foremost goal of the present project .
Proposal Number CTS-0200821Institution Rutgers UniversityPI Name T. Shinbrot and B. GlasserTitle Instabilities and Waves in Sheared Granular MaterialsABSTRACTThe project is to investigate the shear instabilities at the interface between two streams of granular materials flowing down an inclined surface .
The modes of instability produce various mixing characteristics which are of interest in many applications including pharmaceutical and food processing .
The PIs will investigate this problem through experimental and computational methods based on MD and cellular automata simulations .
Anne McCoy of the Ohio State University is supported by the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to investigate photoinitiated processes in weakly bound clusters theoretically .
The following three categories of processes will be examined ( 1 ) ultraviolet photodissociation of binary complexes in which the dissociation induces a bimolecular reaction , ( 2 ) reaction dynamics photoinduced in complexes by vibrationally exciting one of the cluster molecules , and ( 3 ) cluster size effects on transition state dynamics of IHI clustered with argon atoms and the photodissociation of water clusters with argon atoms .
Studies of photoinitiated processes in clusters pose serious challenges theoretically and computationally .
A significant component of this research will involve developing approximate approaches that will enable treatments of at least some of the degrees of freedom classically in the dynamics studies , as well as investigating hybrid quantum/classical methods for propagating the dynamics .
Clusters of molecules provide a laboratory through which interactions between molecules can be examined both experimentally and theoretically .
Clusters can not be considered simply as the sum of their constituent molecules , as the cluster environment generally changes chemical reactions of the complexed molecules .
This research will explore theoretically cluster chemical reactions , many of which can be compared to related experimental results of current interest .
NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0200762Mathematical Sciences The Slip Boundary ConditionAbstract0200762 LichterAlthough the no-slip boundary condition , which requires fluid adjacent to a solid substrate to move with the same velocity as the substrate , serves reliably to model fluid behavior in most circumstances , recent experiments and numerical simulations have shown that , in fact , there is a relative velocity between the fluid and the substrate .
While the effects of this slip may remain negligible in some flows , accounting for slip is a prerequisite for predicting the correct behavior in many other types of flows , such as those in small geometries , flows in which an interface ( between two fluids ) moves along a solid , and flows in which particles must pass through an interface .
This project seeks to develop models of the slip boundary condition .
The formulation will incorporate results of recent experiments and numerical simulations to construct the equations of flow in the neighborhood of a solid substrate .
Preliminary work indicates that such a model , as well as related useful simpler approximations , can be developed .
The simplicity of the equations and consequent efficient numerical procedures for evaluating the dynamics near the wall should provide insight into how slip occurs and how the characteristics of the fluid and the substrate determine the amount and nature of slip .
The recent availability of high quality experimental data and simulation results , as well as the advent of technologies demanding flow in small geometries , make this a timely undertaking .
This project concerns mathematical modeling of the behavior of fluids where they adjoin solids .
The results will allow highly accurate computation of fluid flow , which is essential for the design of small hydrodynamical instruments , including lab-on-a-chip devices .
DMS-0200235Project title Quantum corrections to classical approximationsPI Laszlo Erdos , Georgia Institute of TechnologyAbstractThe proposal contains three related projects that investigateresidual quantum effects in classical approximationsof complex quantum problems .
The first project considersthe correction due to the self-generated magnetic field in the Thomas-Fermi theory of large atoms .
The optimal magnetic field obtained from a variationalprinciple is spatially inhomogeneous .
The second project aims atderiving nonlinear self-consistent evolution equations from the quantum dynamics of many particlesinteracting via weakly coupled Coulomb force .
The quantum statistics of theparticles determine the scaling and the limitingclassical equation ( Hartree or Vlasov ) .
The last projectstudies the long time dynamics of noninteractingelectrons in a random environment in the diffusive regime.On the shorter kinetic time scale the Boltzmannequation has been established earlier.The goal is to determine the quantum corrections to theclassical diffusivity obtained from the Boltzmann equationand verify some predictions of the celebrated scaling theoryof conductance.The physics of charged particles governs all electric phenomena.From theoretical point of view , these particles can be accurately described using many-body quantum mechanics .
In practice , however , the fundamental equation of quantumphysics , the Schr\odinger equation , is too complicated .
Typical electronicdevices contain a huge number of electrons and it is impossible todescribe their precise microscopic behavior even with the current computer technology.The Schr\odinger equation is usually replaced withmuch simpler equations that are computationally more feasible.These equations do not contain all information about the complexelectronic system , but they may describe certain quantitiesof interest with a sufficient precision .
The proposalstudies three complex quantum systems ( i ) a large atom in a self-generated magnetic field ; ( ii ) many charged particles with a weak interaction ; ( iii ) a single electron in an impure medium.The goal is to find the correct approximating equationsand to justify rigorously that they are consistent with the Schr\odinger theory in certain limits.Heuristically , some of these equations can be guessed based uponclassical mechanics .
Quantum mechanics , however , may modifythe classical picture .
The proposed work identifies the quantum correction effects in the classical description of these three basic models .
AbstractOcneanuSince their introduction a century ago , subgroups of SU ( 2 ) and simple Lie groups have evolved almost separately .
In operator algebras no geometrical structure of subfactors has been previously found .
The proponent has found the natural link between subfactors , the subgroups of quantum SU ( 2 ) and the classical and quantum Lie groups , showing that the information for building a simple Lie group comes naturally from the fusion structure on representations of a quantum subgroup of SU ( 2 ) .
The bridge between these two areas of research is a new crystallographic property of homology theory , wherein for instance six term exact sequences correspond to regular hexagons .
These methods yield a natural elementary construction of a canonical basis of the quantum enveloping algebra of the semisimple Lie groups .
The link found between quantum subgroups and root lattices extends beyond SU ( 2 ) and the classical Lie groups .
The proponent found new unimodular root systems in weight lattices associated to general quantum subgroups , which are not connected to any known structures .
The proponent considers the development of the higher analogs of simple Lie groups corresponding to the new root systems a priority .
These are likely to be essentially new mathematical objects with natural many-to-one laws , which have potential applications in constructive QFT in a physical ( 3 or 4 ) number of dimensions , while the usual binary laws produce naturally 2-dimensional field theories.The project is centered around the construction , classification and study of the properties and manifestations of the quantum subgroups of Lie groups .
The quantum deformations of the semisimple Lie groups have , when the quantization parameter is a root of unity , subgroups which are the analogs of the finite subgroups of the classical Lie groups .
The proponent has introduced this structure over the years , starting with the classification of the algebraic structure of small index subfactors in the noncommutative Galois theory for operator algebras .
Other manifestations of these structures appear in topological quantum field theory , where they provide boundary extensions of numerical invariants for 3-manifolds , conformal field theory , and modular invariants .
The quantum subgroups of SU ( 2 ) , SU ( 3 ) and SU ( 4 ) are now classified by the proponent , and show that the quantum world is very different and apparently nearly unrelated to the classical world , with a markedly simpler situation for the exceptional quantum subgroups than for the corresponding classical subgroups .
The project introduces geometrical structures associated to quantum subgroups , with the quantum subgroups of SU ( 2 ) producing the roots weights and canonical bases for the simple Lie groups , while the other quantum subgroups give raise to essentially new generalized root systems in weight lattices .
It is hoped that the new structures produced by the project could play a role in constructing models of quantum field theory in a physical number of dimensions .
The PI requests support for continuing his research activities at the Super-Kamiokande experiment .
His activities will be concentrated in the area of lower energy solar neutrinos to study the long-standing problem of the solar neutrino deficit .
The Detector has suffered an accident that will disable the Detector for about two years .
The group , however , is obligated as a collaborator to participate in the repair and recovery effort that is scheduled to be completed by the end of November of 2003 .
Bulk of the funding for repair and restoration will be provided by the Japanese Government with some support from DoE .
This proposal would also allow the Maryland group to continue to analyze the data collected up to the time of the accident and operate the experiment after restoration .
AbstractXuThe PI will study interactions between operator algebras and conformalfield theories which have proved to be very fruitful lately .
The mainemphasis of this research is placed on the study of certain representation theoryquestions such as Kac-Wakimoto conjecture , orbifolds and boundary states in conformal field theories using operator algebraic techniques .
The applications of these operator algebraic techniqueswill lead to proofs of representation theory questionsand shed lights on exotic subfactors such as those coming from conformal inclusions .
The theory of operator algebras was introduced by John von Neumann in order to provide a proper mathematical framework for Quantum Mechanics .
Conformal field theory was a theory describing critical phenomena incondensed matter physics , and it also plays an important role in string theory .
The remarkable interactions between operator algebrasand conformal field theory has led to many interesting mathematicalissues .
The aim of this researchis to find solutions to some of the important mathematical issues that surface in this context which have a wide range of applications .
This research investigates the application of the phase of laser light to understand and manipulate the behavior of electrons and/or nuclei in isolated molecules and in condensed matter .
By varying the relative phase of two electromagnetic fields , it is possible to control the interference between two competing excitation paths and thereby to alter the branching ratio of a chemical reaction or the direction of a photocurrent .
Moreover , from the laser-phase dependence of the observable , it is possible to obtain fundamentally new information about continuum structure .
Three new initiatives are designed to deepen our understanding of such interference effects .
The first is the application of coherent control to bond-selective chemistry of complex molecules .
Specifically , the interference between one- and three-photon excitation will be used to control the product distribution in the photodissociation of vinyl chloride .
Second , coherent control will be used to manipulate the photodissociation of hydrogen molecules in selected vibrational and rotational levels .
The phase lag spectrum for this process will then be compared with theoretical predictions .
Finally , the theory of phase-lag spectroscopy will be extended to deal with surface resonances , thereby providing a tool for understanding a variety of decay and decoherence mechanisms relevant to photon- and electron-triggered surface chemistry and to electron transport in molecular devices .
This project is jointly funded by the AMOP program in the Physics Division and the EPC program in the Chemistry Division .
This project investigates the areas of harmonic analysis andwavelets concerning the mathematical theory of multi-dimensional wavelet expansions .
One of the fundamentalproblems of the subject is how to construct higher dimensionalwavelet bases with desired characteristics , e.g. , wavelets withgood time-frequency properties .
These areas of research haveseen significant progress due to the contributions of I.Daubechies , R. Coifman , and Y. Meyer , along with many others.However , the majority of research has been concentrated onisotropic theory , leaving many questions involving non-isotropic wavelet theory unanswered .
The proposer willinvestigate this theory of non-isotropic wavelets from threedirections .
The first is to study non-isotropic analogues ofthe standard function spaces associated with expansive dilations.In particular , to examine characterization by wavelet expansionsof Calderon-Zygmund operators associated with non-isotropicdilations .
The second is to construct orthogonal wavelets withgood time-frequency localization for large classes of non-isotropic expansive dilations .
The third is to identify non-isotropic expansive dilations for which the construction ofwell-localized wavelets is impossible.More generally , this proposal represents work on waveletanalysis which is a powerful technique in harmonic analysis.This technique has produced wide-ranging applications to signaland image processing , such as the JPEG 2000 image compressionsystem .
It is expected that further research on multi-dimensional non-isotropic wavelets will continue to produce manyother contributions in pure and applied mathematics .
This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Microbial Biology for FY2002 .
The fellowship supports training and research on the basic biology of protozoan , microalgal , fungal , archaeal , bacterial and viral species that are not generally considered to be model organisms .
Further , it provides opportunities for recent doctoral recipients to obtain additional training in microbial biology , to gain research experience under the sponsorship of established scientists , and to broaden his/her scientific horizons beyond the research experiences during the undergraduate and graduate training .
These fellowships are further designed to assist new scientists to direct their research efforts across traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves of unique research resources , sites , and facilities , including foreign locations .
The research and training plan is entitled Have colicin type antibiotic genes evolved to increase their host bacteria 's competitiveness , or are they selfish addictive genes ?
Colicin type bacteriocins are believed to have evolved as allelopathic agents that confer a competitive advantage to bacterial strains that harbor them .
This research investigates an alternative hypothesis that colicin plasmids are selfish elements and utilize a form of post segregational killing to insure their maintenance by host bacteria .
Determinants of Toeplitz matrices have arisen in many branchesof mathematics and physics .
For example , they describe thespin correlation between two sites in the classical Isingmodel of a two-dimensional magnet .
More recently , they havebeen used to describe statistical properties of random matrices , whose eigenvalues model complicated systems .
The asymptotic behavior of determinants of Toeplitz matricesis described using the Strong Szego-Limit Theorem and itsgeneralizations .
Recently , this theorem was improved in thesense that a new identity was found for the determinant thatallows one to find very good estimates for the error in theSzego expansion of the determinant .
The major purpose ofthis project is to extend this identity to other classes ofmatrices and operators .
This has applications such as finding the distributions of linear statistics in random matrix theory , as well as finding the level spacing of the eigenvalues .
Many physical systems possess such complicated behavior thatexact predictions become impossible , so instead averageproperties of these systems are studied .
For example , theenergy level of a particle of a compound nucleus in a slownuclear reaction has complicated unpredictable behavior.Random matrix theory provides mathematical models that allowa simulation of the energy levels of the particle .
One of the tools that is used to study the statistical behavior of the random matrices and thus of the energy levels , is a determinant of a Toeplitz matrix .
A determinant is a number that yields important information about a square array of numbers .
These Toeplitz determinants occur in manybranches of applied mathematics .
One classical use was tostudy the properties of models of two-dimensional ( or verythin ) magnets .
Determinants are often hard to compute.However , there is a result , called the Strong Szego LimitTheorem , which yields an estimate for such a determinant.Recently , this estimate was improved so that error termscould be calculated more easily .
One major goal of theproject is to extend these results to other classes ofdeterminants .
This will yield information about the energylevels of complicated systems in other types of models , not covered by the Toeplitz case .
Not Available PI Vladimir Sverak , University of Minnesota - Twin Cities DMS-0200326***************Proposal Regularity Theory for Partial Differential Equations withSuper-critical Nonlinearities by V. SverakAbstract In this proposal we suggest to study open problems in regularitytheory of the following partial differential equations1 .
strongly elliptic systems arising as Euler-Lagrange equations for multiple integrals in the Calculus of Variations ; 2. three-dimensional Navier-Stokes equations and some related model equations ; and3 .
Complex Ginzburg-Landau Equations and Landau-Lifschitz equations.The regularity theory for these equations is mainly governed by twofactors the smoothing properties of the linearized operator , and the tendency of the non-linear part to produce singularities.In all the cases above there is a certain critical dimensionbelow which ( and , in many cases , at which ) the natural energyestimates for the equations together with smoothing properties of the linearized operatorare sufficient to guarantee regularity of solutions .
For mostof the equations above the critical dimension is two .
The situationis more complicated above the critical dimension , when the specificsof each equation come much more into play , and not many resultsare known .
The research will concentrate on problems in thisrelatively unmapped area .
The study of regularity theory for Partial Differential Equations ( PDE ) is usually motivated by the following factors ( 1 ) A good regularity theory can serve as an important check that a PDE is appropriate for modeling a given phenomena .
( 2 ) The more information we have about regularity of solutions of a given PDE , the better chance we have to design a good numerical method for calculating its solutions on a computer .
It is no coincidence that the equations for which we can calculate solutions accurately are more or less exactly those for which we have a good regularity theory .
( Confirming that There is nothing quite so practical as a good theory .
) Roughly speaking , the more we know about solutions , the easier it is the avoid some of the many pitfalls into which numerical simulations can fall.The work suggested in this proposal will address basic open problemsin regularity theory for important classes of equations with strongnon-linearities .
Many of these equations ( such as theNavier-Stokes equations , or the Landau-Lifschitz equations ) are ofconsiderable practical interest .
*************************************** The present proposal entails experimental and theoretical elucidation of ( i ) dynamics of hollow fiber ( or nano-tube ) formation during solidification of main chain liquid crystalline polymers ( MCLCP ) and/or rigid-rod polymer solution , ( ii ) dynamics of nano-porous membranes of monomeric mesognes during pattern polymerization , ( iii ) dynamics of microfibril formation during dry-jet spinning , and ( iv ) hybrid-composites .
The well-established time-dependent Ginzburg-Landau TDGL ( Model C ) will be applied in conjunction with the advection term for the tracking of solvent evaporation and flow .
The physical significanace of all parameters pertaining to the governing non-linear reaction-diffusion equations will be clarified , and their predictive capabilitieis will be demonstrated .
The dynamics of pattern formation will be investigated by comparison with the recent experimental observations made in dry-jet and/or electro-spinning .
Recognizing the possible control of domain morphology and improved understanding of mesogenic interactions , the proposed study will be extended to microporous membranes and nano-composites .
The theoretical scheme proposed here demonstrates the spation-temporal evolution of the order parameters ( such as density , concentration and orientation fluctuations ) based on the local free energy and non-local gradient ( diffusive ) terms .
The numerical simulation further illustrates the emergence of the local internal structures during solidification .
Moreover , this methodology can applied to elucidating the microfibrillation dynamics in spinning of semicrystalline polymers and hydrogen bonding systems.It is encouraging to discern unique morphological features encompassing ( i ) nano-tube formation , ( ii ) concentric rings/spiral-breakup leading to microfibrillation and ( iii ) viscous fingering patterns .
The observed phenomenon of spiral breakup is one of the most debated topics in the no-linear dynamics of excitable media and biological systems .
Furthermore , it clearly demonstrates a new approach to the decades-old problem of predicting morphology development in solution-spun fibers such as rough skin/core structures , collapsed kidney shape morphology , and microfibrils .
This methodology has potential for modern technological applications including electro-spinning of nano-fibers/tubes , microporous membranes through pattern photopolymerization induced phase separation , and nano-hybrid composites .
It is anticipated that these microporous membranes have widespread applications usch as fuel cell membranes , filtration , and drug delivery .
Furthermore , some of the simutaion programs have been written in C++ and can be shown on live-mode with the aid of an LCD projector .
Such interactive programs are proven to be useful for classroom teaching and demonstration to the public .
The project provides funds for a block travel grant for U.S. sociologists to attend the XVth World Congress of the International Sociological Association in Brisbane , Australia , July 7-13 , 2002 .
The major conference of the International Sociological Association , the World Congress occurs at four-year intervals and attracts approximately 5,000 participants .
Support for travel of U.S. sociologists permits continued growth of international exchange and collaboration in sociology .
An activity of this type is particularly timely given the necessity to promote international collaborations on challenges arising from global social processes and transformations , including those stemming from global interconnectedness , the new technolgies associated with the internet , and the growing hybridization of cultures .
Evaluation of indiviudal requests for travel awards , selection of recipients , and the distriubtion of funds will be the responsibility of the American Sociological Association .
Competitive criteria for an award include an iinvitation or acceptance of a paper , the scientific merit of the paper , and qualifications of the applicant .
The selection process will seek to ensure a presence at the World Congress of junior scholars and sociologists underrepresented in international scholarly meetings .
Stephen Lee and Francis J. DiSalvo of Cornell University and Dhandapani Venkataraman of the University of Massachusetts are supported by the Division of Chemistry and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate for their interdisciplinary collaboration aimed developing crystal design strategies for molecular metals .
They will study ways to control the transition from the insulating state to the metallic state in organic systems .
Because the superconducting critical temperature , Tc , is highest in metals containing light elements , ( ie. , the carbon and oxygen in fullerides and copper oxides ) this study will focus on a number of distinctly different multi-dimensional organic metals .
Important multi-dimensional crystal design parameters , such as packing efficiencies , local dipole-dipole interactions , hydrophobic-hydrophilic interactions , hydrogen bonding and coordination bonding , will be delineated .
In these systems , which will include multidimensional pi coordinated molecular networks , pthalocyanines and inorganic clusters coupled to pi organics , effects of electronic structure on Tc- will be investigated , and connections made to the problem of hole and electron mobility in organic semiconductors .
Collaborative Research in Chemistry ( CRC ) awards are given to interdisciplinary teams of scientists working on problems of broad chemical interest .
The emphasis in these awards is on new collaborative modes of research and training .
The main objective of the Gordon Research Photonuclear Conference isto provide the international community of nuclear scientists with aunique forum in which the newest developments at the forefront ofthis science can be presented and subjected to detailed and extendeddiscussions and criticism .
The purpose of the conference is toencourage communication and the discussions to be conducted in anatmosphere conducive to open interactions between the scientists , provoking new and even speculative ideas for future research .
Toaccomplish these goals requires the participation in all of theconference activities of a significant number of leaders in thefield .
The participation of younger scientists is essential toaddress the future manpower needs of this rapidly changing field.Therefore , bright and promising postdoctoral researchers andgraduate students have been specially selected for participation inthis conference and encouraged to present their ideas .
Theirparticipation in this conference provides them with unique andextensive access to the leaders in their field , exposes them to newresearch opportunities and techniques and helps prepare them for theleadership roles they will assume in the future .
This award willfacilitate participation from these junior scientists .
This research project , supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program , addresses the question of the effect of the spatial and temporal organization of adsorbed reactants and reactive intermediates on the kinetics of surface reactions .
Using scanning tunneling microscopy , Professor Madix and his coworkers in the Department of Chemical Engineering at Stanford University , examine the spatial distribution of adsorbed species in static and time dependent measurements .
Studies of oxidation reactions on silver , auto-catalytic surface explosions on nickel and palladium , and poisoning and promotion by selected surface reaction modifiers are examined .
In addition , the steady state distribution of adsorbed intermediates in surface oxidation reactions are studied .
Information from this experimental project provides input into the development of detailed models of surface reaction kinetics , as well as fundamental insight into the nature of the dynamic catalytic surface .
Understanding the effect of the organization of reactive intermediates in two dimensions on the overall kinetics of surface reactions is the goal of this research project carried out by Professor Madix at Stanford University .
Using tools that allow the atomic level imaging of the reacting surface , detailed information about the role of adsorbate structure on the surface reaction kinetics is obtained .
This information is crucial to our detailed understanding of a range of important catalytic reaction systems , and extends to the understanding of surface reactions in a variety of technologically important contexts .
Lower EAR-0209795This proposal was received in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering initiative NSF 01-157 , category NER , and is co-funded by the GEO and ENG Directorates .
The collaborative team states that while it is generally held that inter- and intra-molecular forces ultimately govern the interactions between biomolecules and inorganic surfaces , it is difficult to gain an appreciation of these forces because they exist at a seemingly infinitesimal magnitude .
The central aim of this proposal is to begin to bridge this gap by using force microscopy to discover and explore the nanoscale forces at the interface between bacterially produced proteins and mineral surfaces or other inorganic phases .
Force measurements will provide a quantitative measure of the natural affinity between nanoscale biomolecules and inorganic surfaces .
These force data will be used to design a soft-lithographic technique in which a bacterium is used as a living pen that produces and secretes various proteins as nanoscale patterns onto a solid surface .
Not Available Filament channels are the common denominator for the origin of coronal mass ejections , erupting filaments and associated flares .
These events do not occur until the filament has reached a critical stage of development .
This proposal consists of five observational projects and one theoretical project all aimed at the single goal of understanding the origin and evolution of filament channels as a physical basis to elements of space weather .
Truong-Thao NguyenCUNY City CollegeThe fast growth of the applied area of analog-to-digital conversion has simultaneously hindered the solid establishment of its mathematical foundations .
This has become particularly critical with the currently successful technique of modulation , as recent results of the principal investigator have shown the inaccuracy of the conversion error model universally adopted until now .
The research proposed in this project is based on recent discoveries of fundamental algebraic properties of n th order modulators and aims at establishing the first general algebraic foundations to modulation .
On going research has already proved effective in correcting the classical error model .
Although new practical improved techniques may not be the immediate outcome to this small grant proposal , the establishments of solid foundations will enable the growth of powerful analytical tools , opening new directions of design not accessible by the currently empirical approach to modulation .
The objective of the proposed research is to identify and quantify the conditions that lead to carbide oxidation and to investigate the use of promoters and promoted supports to improve the stability of these catalysts .
Because of its widespread use in other applications , the project will focus only on molybdenum carbide catalysts .
Since it is likely that catalyst stability is highly dependent on redox chemistry , the first stage of the proposed research will focus on determining the effects of reactant/product compositions on the oxidation kinetics of bulk molybdenum carbide catalysts synthesized by various methods to produce relatively high surface areas per unit mass .
Since excess synthesis carbon can lead to subsequent coking problems , the catalyst synthesis protocol will be carried out so that excess carbon can be controlled or eliminated .
The methodology will consist of dynamic x-ray diffraction and TGA/MS experiments ( at reforming conditions ) , combined with appropriate catalyst characterization techniques ( FTIR , XPS , SEM/TEM ) .
In the second stage of the proposed work , the PI will investigate methods to increase the range of catalyst stability through the use of supported molybdenum carbide catalysts , promoted with an in oxygen buffer ( curia ) .
Parameters to be investigated in this phase of the project will include the characteristics of the support ( surface area , acidity ) , the catalyst synthesis methodology and the catalyst/promoter loading .
This project has the potential to provide a more efficient route for making hydrogen for fuel cells .
This project involves laboratory and field studies to help elucidate the chemical mechanisms underlying ozone production and hydroxyl radical reactivity in the atmosphere .
This research includes intercomparison and development of instrumentation for measuring atmospheric free radicals , and studying the mixing ratios , loss rates and kinetics in urban , rural , and remote sites of the hydroxyl and the hydroperoxyl radicals .
The project will investigate the source of observed and evening and nighttime signals of these radicals , as well as develop and deploy detection capabilities for atmospheric free radicals .
This is a Focused Research Group award between the University of California in San Diego , Northern Illinois University , and Yale University .
Its aim is to carry out detailed structural and dynamical studies of polymer films , using the non-invasive proves of x-ray and neutron scattering at national synchrotron radiation and neutron scattering facilities , in order to achieve a better scientific understanding at the microscopic level of the static and dynamic behavior of macromolecules at solid/liquid interfaces and at free ( liquid/vapor ) surfaces in the fluid state and around the glass transition .
This scientific understanding is needed because at present there is a considerable divergence of results from experiments and also of theoretical views regarding the nature of the fluctuations at polymeric surfaces and of the glass transition in thin polymer films .
The roles of confinement ( e.g .
when the film thickness is comparable to the radius of gyration of the polymer chains ) and of the polymer-substrate interactions need to be elucidated in more detail to achieve such an understanding .
The techniques to be brought to bear on these problems include x-ray and neutron reflectivity , diffuse x-ray scattering , small-angle neutron scattering and x-ray photon correlation spectroscopy.The scientific interest driving this project stems from our present limited knowledge of how the conformation and mobility of polymer molecules are affected by confinement to a thin film and by interactions with the substrate and how these materials transform into the glassy state .
It 's technological importance is related to the important role played by polymer films in industry and technology in the form of coatings , adhesives , filters for chemical separations , packaging materials , lithographic masks for microelectronic devices , etc .
Further , it will provide an opportunity for students and postdoctoral researchers at three different educational institutions to be trained in this important area of materials science and in the use of advanced research methods utilizing the nation 's premier national facilities for research using synchrotron x-ray and neutron beams .
The main objective of the Gordon Research Conference on NuclearChemistry is to provide the international community of nuclearscientists with a unique forum in which the newest developments atthe forefront of this science can be presented and subjected todetailed and extended discussions and criticism .
The purpose of theconference is to encourage communication and the discussions to beconducted in an atmosphere conducive to open interactions betweenthe scientists , provoking new and even speculative ideas for futureresearch .
To accomplish these goals requires the participation inall of the conference activities of a significant number of leadersin the field .
The participation of younger scientists is essentialto address the future manpower needs of this rapidly changing field.Therefore , bright and promising postdoctoral researchers andgraduate students have been specially selected for participation inthis conference and encouraged to present their ideas .
Theirparticipation in this conference provides them with unique andextensive access to the leaders in their field , exposes them to newresearch opportunities and techniques and helps prepare them for theleadership roles they will assume in the future .
This award willfacilitate participation from these junior scientists .
Todd0209457 In this project , the investigator and his students studyimproved interior-point algorithms for convex , especiallysecond-order and semidefinite , programming problems .
Inparticular , they investigate finding more accurate solutions tolarge-scale problems of this kind , interpreting the output ofinfeasible-interior-point methods as searching for infeasibilitycertificates when applied to infeasible problems , using ideas ofRiemannian geomentry to develop new interior-point methods forpossibly infeasible problems , and studying new barrier functionsto be used in highly asymmetric problems , where usual primal-onlyor primal-dual methods would be inefficient .
All these ideas aretested out by implementing them in the software package SDPT3 , developed by the investigator and two of his collaborators , whichis a competitive primal-dual code available over the internet ( e.g. , athttp//www.math.cmu.edu/~reha/sdpt3.html ) and within the NEOS system ( http//www-neos.mcs.anl.gov/neos/server-solvers.html ) for distributed computing .
Interior-point algorithms are a new and excitingcomputational method for solving large-scale resource allocationand other optimization problems .
For example , they have beenused to develop better designs for truss structures , such asbridges , that are better able to resist a wide range of externalloads .
Another application is the design of antenna arrays tohighlight the receptivity in certain directions while muting thatin all other directions .
In finance , they are used to developoptimal portfolios to balance an acceptable rate of return withlow volatility ( unfortunately , these methods are only as good asthe data they employ , and past history often does not give a goodindication of future performance ) .
In this and other contexts , the idea of robust optimization , to find solutions to problemsthat satisfy all constraints even when the data are perturbed alittle , and that give good performance measures even when thedata are slightly changed , is very attractive , and this class ofmethods is successful in treating some problems of this kindalso .
A last application mentioned here is currently beingstudied by the investigator and a statistics colleague trying tofind a good way to classify new data into one of two classes ( e.g. , with or without a cancerous tumour ) on the basis of sometraining data ( with known classification ) .
This problem is ofinterest in data mining and biomedical fields .
In all theseproblems , there is a desire to solve larger and larger instances ( involving tens of thousands of variables and constraints ) moreand more accurately .
The investigator and his collaboratorsstudy theoretically and practically ways to improve existingalgorithms to extend their capabilities in these directions .
The goal of this project is to determine the biological functions of a newly recognized class of Arabidopsis regulatory molecules - the small RNAs .
The small RNAs typically contain 20-25 nucleotides and are likely generated by a dsRNA-specific , RNaseIII-like mechanism .
Recently , 125 small RNAs were identified in Arabidopsis .
Several arise from sequences in known or predicted protein-coding genes and transposons .
The vast majority , however , arise from intergenic sequences between conventional genes .
The Arabidopsis small RNAs resemble small interfering RNAs ( siRNAs ) associated with RNA silencing and small temporal RNAs ( stRNAs ) associated with translational control in C. elegans .
These Arabidopsis RNAs are proposed to function in posttranscriptional regulation of gene and mRNA activity by several mechanisms , including RNA silencing , translational interference and epigenetic mechanisms in the nucleus .
New libraries of small RNAs will be prepared using different tissues , a database of small RNA information will be assembled , and the small RNA sequences will be deposited into GenBank ( www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov ) .
The function of small RNAs from protein-coding genes in posttranscriptional RNA silencing , and the function of small RNAs from intergenic regions in translational control and modification of nuclear DNA will be determined .
Finally , the roles of each of nine RNaseIII-like proteins in small RNA biosynthesis will be analyzed .
Results will be shared in peer-reviewed journals , at the International Conference on Arabidopsis Research , and on a database of small RNA information .
The database , which will include capabilities for searching small RNA map positions , information about nearest genes , whether or not a given gene is near a small RNA , and other interactive features and results , will be made web-accessible to the scientific community ( www.cgrb.orst.edu/carrington/smallRNAs ) .
The publicly accessible database of small RNA information will have broad impact by providing researchers with information about small RNAs near or within genes of interest and allowing subsequent experiments on the roles of small RNA-based regulation of the Arabidopsis genome .
Genes are controlled by many different mechanisms .
Recently , a new type of regulatory system involving an unusual class of small RNA molecules was discovered .
The small RNAs are proposed to function by binding to messenger RNA from specific gene targets .
The small RNA would then trigger either cleavage of messenger RNA or inhibit the function of the messenger RNA to which it is bound .
This project will result in discovery of new types of small RNA molecules and determine how these regulators affect gene expression in the model plant , Arabidopsis thaliana .
Recent progress by the investigators in the simulation of incompressible viscous flow modeled by the Navier-Stokes equations and their visco-elastic and visco-plastic generalizations in two and three dimensions has led to the proposed work in challenging three-dimensional problems .
Specifically , the authors intend to study the direct simulation of pressure-driven particulate flow in three dimensional pipes and horizontal drilling wells , the fluid being either Newtonian or non-Newtonian with the number of particles ranging in the thousands .
They will also study the direct numerical simulation of blood flow around three-leaflet prosthetic heart valves .
These problems require methodological advances such as the numerical treatment of collisions , the motion of non-spherical objects in viscous fluids and the coupling of fictitious domain and Chimera type methods in order to improve the treatment of boundary layers .
During the past six years , the investigators of this award have developed a methodology well suited to numerical simulation of flow in regions with moving boundaries .
The resulting methodology has been successfully applied by the authors and other scientists and engineers to the solution of difficult problems from Sciences and Engineering .
Among these problems are the direct simulation of sedimentation , fluidization and particle transport phenomena , which play an important role in various areas in Sciences and Engineering ( Petroleum Engineering , Food Industry , ... ) .
The main goals of this project are to ( 1 ) improve the existing methodology so that it can address fluid/particle interaction for particles of relatively complicated shape , ( 2 ) develop realistic models and efficient methods for the computational treatment of the collisions taking place in fluid/particle interactions , ( 3 ) apply the resulting methodology to an important problem in cardio-vascular medicine namely , the simulation of blood flow/heart valve interaction and ( 4 ) simulate slurry transportation in horizontal pipelines and wells , an important issue in enhanced oil recovery .
In the heart valve project , the goal is to use the simulation tool to design artificial heart valves generating much less thrombin ( a natural blood thickener causing artery clotting ) than the ones currently used , which require the patient to take blood thinning drugs which have in general health damaging side effects .
The hope is that with an improved design the need for blood thinners will be substantially reduced if not eliminated .
This part of project will be done in collaboration with cardio-vascular specialists ( including heart surgeons ) in the USA and Europe .
This award supports travel and living expenses for 8 to 10 US advanced students to participate in a near-surface volcano-geophysics field camp on Montserrat .
The purpose of the field camp is to train these students in the use of advanced geophysical equipment in the study of active volcanic terrains .
The request for student training takes advantage of an existing US0-NSF and UK-NERC sponsored effort to understand the science and hazards of the relatively silisic volcanic system on Montserrat .
The student training is further being organized so as to take advantage of the advanced volcano-geophysics and near-surface enivornmental-geophysics field camp that will be run on Montserrat by J. Neuberg ( Leeds University , the UK ) .
As a result , there will be no costs for renting or transporting heavy geophysical equipment to this island volcano .
It is also anticipated that the results of the field camp will be used in planning the installation of the geophysical observatories that are part of the NSF/NERC sponsored science program on Montserrat.The educational purpose of the field camp will be two fold ( 1 ) to demonstrate the techniques and value of 3D geophysical surveying and data in active volcanic geology , and ( 2 ) acquaint a large group of students with the scientific objectives and research possibilities of the Montserrat progrm .
The student fieldwork and data analysis include advanced training in modern geophysical investigation methods and extensive interactions between industry , government , and the universities involved in the Montserrat science program .
Funds are transferred to NOAA to support one 2002 NOAA Knauss Sea Grant Fellow within the NSFDivision of Ocean Sciences .
The Fellow will work with OCE program staff for one year and participate in various activities related to ocean science research , policy , and marine education .
The Fellow will gain valuable first-hand experience by working on diverse activities related to ocean science research policy and administration .
The Fellow will work with the Ocean Section and the Oceanographic Technology & Interdisciplinary Coordination Program .
The National Sea Grant Federal Fellowship Program is administrated through NOAA 's Office of Oceanic Research Programs .
Not Available Not Available The rise of ubiquitous computing has prompted the need for a change in the way we store and access information .
It calls for the study of data storage systems that distribute information over wide area networks , enabling users to store and access critical data in a continuously available and highly trustable fashion .
The problem of data distribution , i.e. , storing data in networked storage systems while achieving data reliability , confidentiality and performance is studied.Data distribution schemes based on ( n , k ) error correcting codes are investigated .
The research will focus on two key questions 1 ) how to achieve strong and computationally efficient data encryption while storing data over a distributed networked environment ?
and 2 ) how to place encoded data segments in networked systems , while considering the structure of the network topology , to enable high performance and reliable data retrieval ?
Insights and results from this research program will provide guidelines for efficient , secure and reliable data distribution schemes for wired and wireless networks , as well as make significant contributions to related theory study , such as cryptography , coding theory , graph theory and combinatorics .
In addition , efforts will be made to integrate this research program into educational activities .
The PI will undertake a computational study of scalar transport ( e.g. , contaminants or thermal energy ) in wall turbulence and the influence of Prandtl ( or Schmidt ) number on near-wall and dispersion behavior .
Central to this study will be the development of Direct Numerical Simulation ( DNS ) in conjunction with Langrangian Scalar Tracking ( LST ) for the generation of numerical data and the development of descriptive models .
The program will incorporate advances in High Performance Computing to allow the detailed investigation of heat and mass transfer in turbulent flow for a variety of fluid systems .
Central concerns are the prediction of the spatial variation of turbulent transport properties , the effect of molecular Prandtl number on turbulent transport and the effect of boundary conditions on the scalar property transport .
The innovations of the present work are ( a ) the use of hydrodynamics generated by a Direct Numerical Simulation ( DNS ) to generate Lagrangian data for turbulent dispersion ; ( b ) the development of plane Couette flow simulations for the study of transport in the constant stress region ; and ( c ) the study of chemical reaction in turbulence in the Lagrangian framework .
The results , if successful , will have impact on a variety of practical heat and mass transfer problems ( heat exchange , mixing , reactor flows , turbine blade cooling , pollutant dispersion in the atmosphere ) .
The work will also foster the application of HPC technology in ways that will make DNS more assessable and cost effective , and potentially will lead to the ability to study scalar transport in other important physical problems , such as transport in very small-scale flows .
Specific plans have been laid out to introduce HPC to undergraduate students who will participate in the research at different stages of the work and through the introduction of HPC into the curriculum of Chemical Engineering at the University of Oklahoma .
Bonnie HeckCCR-0209179Integrated System-Theorectic and Software-Enabled Strategies for Embedded Smart Sensors in Hybrid SystemsThis research addresses the efficient design and effective operation of smart sensor suites , which are to be embedded in complex hybrid systems with multiple modes of operation and multiple mission / fault scenarios .
An integrated approach is being pursued in which system-theoretic analysis is combined with real-time embedded software design techniques that focus on composition and dynamic reconfiguration issues .
This integrative approach supports the design of the sensor suite , including its management software , which is capable of fusing information from heterogeneous sensors to develop estimates for physical parameters and detect / diagnose faults , and of dynamically reconfiguring itself in the face of identified fault scenarios or mode changes .
The research addresses system-theoretic issues and software-design issues on a concurrent basis so that the requirements and capabilities of the two sides can be understood and taken into account .
Hence , issues such as synchronizing data from multiple distributed sources and managing transitions while reconfiguring continuous components , are being formalized and explicitly accounted for throughout the design , beginning with the sensor selection / placement decision to the development of algorithms for sensor fusion and dynamic reconfiguration .
This work is drawing upon existing results in the hybrid systems literature and developing some additional theories and tools as necessary .
The topics studied in this research includeo Sensor placement in a distributed hybrid system What types of sensors should be placed where so that important changes , both continuous and discrete , can be observed with required accuracies.o Sensor fusion How the signals generated from a heterogeneous sensor array will be combined to generate useful information , such as physical states , parameter values , and fault status , under different modes of operation.o Dynamic reconfiguration How to reconfigure on the fly the processing and fusing of signals from different sensors , in the face of an identified fault or a mode change , and how the information will be transitioned from one mode to another.The research is creating system-theoretic and software modeling tools for constructing smart sensor suites that can adapt to changes and faults that occur in a complex hybrid system .
The research is also expected to improve the fundamental understanding into the observability property of hybrid systems and the design and analysis of a state estimator for such a system .
The theoretical / methodological development is being validated on sensor suites for real applications ( e.g. , a three tank process demonstrator ) so that no important real issues are overlooked.On the educational front , cross-disciplinary course ( s ) and research programs are being developed that breed a unique set of students versed in both systems-control theories and real-time software design .
Munroe 0209993This is a proposal submitted by Dr. Jeffrey Munroe , Middlebury College , to request a planning visit to the Qinghai and Tibetan Plateau , China , to collect information for developing a cooperative study with Lanzhou University on late Pleistocene glaciation .
This is an important topic for understanding the amount of water tied up in glacial ice .
This visit can also provide a unique opportunity to two American investigators early in their career to visit the plateau and to enrich their knowledge of Asian continental glaciation with first-hand observations .
This research focuses on understanding the principles of building responsive polymeric materials by means of self-assembly of polymers at surfaces .
Applications of the multilayering technique to produce new materials for controlled delivery of chemicals have been recently proposed , yet there is presently no adequate understanding of the response properties of multilayered films .
Multilayers will be built using various copolymers that contain centers for both electrostatic and hydrogen bonding ; and the fraction of monomer units within a copolymer will be systematically varied to control pH/ionic strength at which the films delaminate or swell .
Novel modifications of the polymers will produce non-delaminating films with targeted response properties .
The film growth and response properties will be determined by in situ ATR-FTIR spectroscopy , in situ ellipsometry in phase-modulated mode , and permeability ionizations and degree of hydrogen-bonding among the layered molecules .
The second will enable measurements of the swelling of the films in different environmental measurements .
The question of how they are translated into changes in film density and stability will be addressed .
Finally , the knowledge of interlayer interactions , swelling and permeability of the films will be used to build polymeric containers with rationally designed response of the membrane.This research might enable the design of novel layered polymer films and capsules with targeted response characteristics .
The potential applications of these materials include temporary protection layers , responsive coatings and controlled delivery of chemicals , such as pesticides , fragrances or drugs .
EIA-0209761Roberts , Fred SRutgers UniversitySpecial Projects Mathematical Sciences Methods for the Study of Deliberate Release of Biological Agents and their ConsequencesThis effort will fund an interdisciplinary workshop to investigate the potential uses of methods of the mathematical sciences ( math , computer sciences , statistics , operations research ) to fight bioterrorism .
The group will identify the challenges posed by bioterrorism , will identify potential uses of mathematical sciences methods to fight it , then will focus on specific areas of emphasis .
The group will examine alternative preventative measures such as vaccination , vaccine dilution and antibiotic and vaccine stockpiling or responsive strategies such as the isolation of individuals , buildings , populations and regions , the rapid control of mass transportation systems , and the systematic surveillance of the food and water supply .
Topics of interest will include multiple outbreaks , the impact of bioterriorism on agricultural systems and food supply , and the spread of pathogens through buildings , in water systems , and in communications systems .
This project is fundamental research to improve the performance of intelligent software agents , based on the observation that an agent 's past experiences are a valuable and generally underutilized database .
The goal is to produce algorithms that make stronger use of data than existing reinforcement learning algorithms , enabling a view of the agent 's stored experiences as a repository that can be mined for performance-improving information .
More generally , the agent may choose to use data obtained by observing other agents , or even from mining the web.The impact of this research may be felt in many areas .
For example , software learning agents can be expected to learn in a much more human-like manner ; noteworthy experiences will be remembered , and their influence on future performance will not attenuate .
There will be no sampling requirements on the data , so it will be possible to learn from watching others and possible to use repositories of stored data to learn new behaviors .
Among the likely practical applications of this work are network management and electronic commerce .
INTERDISCIPLINARY WORKSHOP ON REPUTATION MECHANISMS IN ONLINE COMMUNITIESThis is an interdisciplinary academic symposium on Reputation Systems .
The production of trust is an important requirement for forming and growing open online communities .
Online reputation reporting systems , such as eBay 's well-known feedback mechanism , have emerged as an important trust building mechanism in such settings .
The rising practical importance of online reputation systems invites rigorous research in this largely virgin territory .
Do these systems truly promote efficient market outcomes ?
To what extent can they be manipulated by strategic buyers and sellers ?
What is the best way to design them ?
How should buyers ( and sellers ) use the information provided by such mechanisms in their decision-making process ?
This is just a small subset of unanswered questions , which invite exciting and valuable research .
This workshop will bring together scholars and practitioners from a wide range of disciplines whose research informs the analysis and design of reputation systems .
The workshop chairs will prepare a report summarizing the conclusions of the symposium .
The report will provide a snapshot of the current state of the field and an agenda for future research .
In this project , funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division , Reisler will undertake a detailed study of binary intermolecular interactions that range from weak covalent to van der Waals couplings .
Systems to be studied include weakly bound dimers of free radicals , hydrogen-bonded dimers of ammonia with weak pi-acids , and adducts of strong Lewis acids and bases .
Several techniques will be used pair-correlated velocity and angular distributions of dissociation fragments and IR-UV excitation/detection ; recently developed resolution and detection sensitivity schemes will be employed for images of the velocity and angular distributions of dissociation fragment ; and REMPI and photoelectron spectroscopies will be applied to study the fragment properties .
This project deals with the question of how molecules interact with one another .
The results of such interactions depend on the strength of forces between the interaction partners .
This research uses several experimental techniques to investigate the reaction dynamics for several select systems that exhibit different strengths of interactions .
The research is directed to obtain detailed quantitative information of the behavior of interacting molecules and the results will bring about a better understanding of gas phase chemical reactions .
The work will be conducted with students and postdoctoral research associates .
An effective outreach program is part of this project .
Proposal Number SRS-0209274Principal Investigator Smith , William B.Proposer American Statistical AssociationAbstractThe unsolicited proposal from the American Statistical Association ( ASA ) to the Division of Science Resources Statistics ( SRS ) of the National Science Foundation involves establishing an ASA/SRS-NSF Research Program .
The Program would entail having an outstanding academic researcher/fellow conduct interdisciplinary research using SRS data .
The researcher/fellow would be selected through a rigorous , competitive application process .
The proposed program is similar to other that ASA has established with several other Federal statistical agencies including the Bureau of the Census , the Bureau of Economic Analysis , the National Center for Health Statistics , the National Center for Education Statistics , and the Bureau of Justice Statistics .
Not Available Not Available Dr. Martha Reynolds , Department of Chemistry , Colgate University , is supported by the Inorganic , Bioinorganic , and Organometallic Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division for a study of the oxidation of halide ions by metal-bound peroxides .
A series of new molybdenum ( VI ) , vanadium ( V ) , and tungsten ( VI ) peroxo complexes with ligands that vary systematically in their electron-donating properties will be synthesized and the reactivity toward bromide oxidation will be measured spectrophotometrically .
These experiments will test the hypothesis that the electronic structure of a chelating ligand controls the strength of the peroxo bond in predictable ways , which in turn governs the reactivity of the complex as an oxidant .
The reactivity of complexes that contain both peroxide and bromide or chloride directly bound to the metal will be examined .
Such species represent possible intermediates in the peroxometal-mediated oxidation of halide ion .
Because of the sensitivity of peroxo and metal-oxo vibrational frequencies to chemical changes , infrared spectroscopy will be used to obtain more detailed information on the mechanism of bromide oxidation and infrared-spectroelectrochemistry will be employed to compare the molecular details of the one- and two-electron oxidation chemistry of peroxometal complexes.Peroxide-containing metal complexes find application as catalysts for the oxidation or bromination of a variety of organic compounds .
A biological example of such a catalyst is vanadium bromoperoxidase , an enzyme found in seaweed that produces oxidized bromine for the purpose of protecting the seaweed against predators or microorganisms .
This project will provide an increased understanding of peroxometal complexes - and thereby of vanadium haloperoxidase enzymes - and holds promise for the development of new oxidation and bromination catalysts that may prove useful in the synthesis of anticancer , antimicrobial , and insulin-mimetic pharmaceuticals , and of oxidized or brominated organic compounds more generally .
Students undertaking this research will gain facility in chemical synthesis , spectroscopic and electrochemical techniques , and chemical kinetics .
Not Available This proposal is a three-part research program aimed at a better understanding of stochastic dynamical systems .
In the first part , entitled Stochastic Equations in Infinite Dimensions , I propose to study some prototype stochastic partial differential equations which arise in connection with hydrodynamic turbulence and other problems in nonequilibrium statistical mechanics .
The emphasis is on going beyond the more standard existence/uniqueness statements for these equations and considering harder questions like What does a typical solution look like ?
What are the properties of its probability density function ?
In the second part of the proposal , entitled Effective Stochastic Modeling , I consider large systems where the variables can be separated into two groups evolving on different time scales .
Effective equations for the slow variables alone are derived by elimination of the fast variables using techniques which borrow from singular perturbations techniques for Markov processes .
Finally , in the third part of the proposal , entitled Transition Pathways -- String Method , I consider systems where , due to the disparity between typical energy barriers in the system and the thermal energy available , the dynamics proceed by long waiting periods around the metastable states followed by sudden jumps from one state to the other .
The effective dynamics in these systems is determined by the transition pathways between the metastable states and the rates at which these transitions occur .
The objective here is to develop and implement efficient numerical algorithms which compute these paths and rates.Despite the rapid improvement of computer performance , many problems of scientific and engineering interest will not be amenable to direct numerical simulations in the foreseeable future .
Typical problems arising , for example , in hydrodynamic turbulence , dynamical critical phenomena , climate modeling , molecular dynamics , phase transition in spatially extended systems , involve such a large number of variables interacting on so many different space-time scales that they vastly overwhelm direct numerical computations .
On the other hand , while a complete description of the dynamics in these examples is impossible , it is also not necessarily useful .
Indeed one is typically interested only in some coarse-grained variables , suitably defined by means of averaging over appropriate ensembles ( time , space , ... ) , which evolve in a more regular fashion and thereby provide the most useful information about the system .
The main objective of the present proposal is to improve the techniques for such a statistical analysis of these large systems -- including the identification of the coarse-grained variables and the equations they satisfy .
The common emphasis is on techniques which are truly computational tools -- either analytical or numerical -- and allow for concrete and explicit investigation of the properties of the solutions .
This award supports theoretical and computational research and education in polymer physics .
The PI will investigate ( a ) polymer crystallization , and ( b ) translocation of DNA and other polymer molecules through protein channels and nanopores .
Crystallization of polymers from solutions and melts is an intriguing and longstanding research problem in polymer science .
The PI will model the shapes and sizes of lamellar crystals and their kinetics using simulation and theory .
The basic parameters of the study are ( a ) torsional energy along chain backbone and chain stiffness , ( b ) van der Waals energy between nonbonded atoms and solvent quality , ( c ) chain length , ( d ) polymer concentration , ( e ) temperature , and ( f ) strength and rate of flow .
These parameters will be systematically explored in simulations of the sizes , shapes and symmetries of formed crystals , and details of their growth fronts under different conditions .
Coarse-grained models of kinetics of polymer crystallization will be built .
These will incorporate the essential molecular features revealed in these simulations .
An aim of this work is to understand the early stages of how polymer molecules organize into crystals in solution .
The proposed research will go beyond the models of Lauritzen and Hoffmen , and of Sadler and Gilmer .
How polymer molecules are transported from one location to another under physiochemically imposed fields is also not well understood , although the very existence of life depends on polymer translocation .
Research will address conceptual challenges associated with a fundamental understanding of translocation of a single polyelectrolyte such as DNA/RNA through channels and nanopores .
These challenges include ( a ) how confinement free energy of a polymer is affected by interacting cavities and their connectivity , ( b ) how the polymer moves in this free energy landscape due to local free energy gradients and externally imposed fields , ( c ) role of hydrodynamics on polymer movement in confinement , ( d ) orientational coupling of the polymer backbone with the directionality of the pore , ( e ) interference from the secondary structures of the polymer on translocation , and ( f ) pattern-directed controlled release of polyelectrolyte molecules from confinement .
This theoretical and computational work complements experimental investigations and may also be relevant to applied areas , such as polymer processing , fabrication of polymeric nanomaterials , separation techniques like chromatography and electrophoresis , signal transduction in biology , and high-speed sequencing of DNA and proteins .
This award also has a broad impact on education at all levels. % % % This award supports theoretical and computational research and education in polymer physics .
The PI will investigate ( a ) polymer crystallization , and ( b ) translocation of DNA and other polymer molecules through protein channels and nanopores .
Crystallization of polymers from solutions and melts is a longstanding and intriguing research problem in polymer science .
A fundamental understanding of how polymer chains organize into heirarchical structures remains elusive .
Analogously , how polymer molecules are transported from one location to another under physiochemically imposed fields is not well understood , although the very existence of life depends on polymer translocation .
The PI aims to build new conceptual models and discover new laws of polymer organization and motility .
This theoretical and computational work complements experimental investigations and may also be relevant to applied areas such as polymer processing , fabrication of polymeric nanomaterials , separation techniques like chromatography and electrophoresis , signal transduction in biology , and high-speed sequencing of DNA and proteins .
This award also has a broad impact on education at all levels .
*** ABSTRACT DMS - 0209306.PI Gueo GrantcharovThe project aims to study three problems of the Hermitian geometry of thecompact non-Kaehler complex manifolds The geometry of Hermitian manifolds admittingtotally non-degenerate torus action , Hermitian structures on Riemannian manifoldsadmitting many compatible complex structures and geometry of hypercomplex manifoldsand connections with totally antisymmetric torsion .
The methods of investigationinclude Kodaira-Spencer-Kuranishi deformation theory , Lichnerowicz formulas for Dirac operators and vanishing theorems , twistor correspondence , Kaehler orbifolds , nilpotent Lie groups , moment maps for various spaces with geometric structures , harmonic maps and others .
If the project is successful , it is expected a new examples of Einstein Hermitian manifolds to be obtained , the existence problem of HKT structure on arbitrary hypercomplex manifold to be solved ( negatively ) and some characterization or rigidity type results for manifolds with many complex structures to be found.The role of the abstract spaces constructed from the complex numbers in thetheoretical foundations of quantum mechanics is significant .
It increases in thedevelopment of quantum mechanic to the theory of quantum fields .
A more recentinvestigations in the theoretical physics are directed toward a unification of thequantum mechanics and general relativity .
This , yet hypothetical theory , is called string theory and for a long time the Kaehler geometry of the complex spaces has served as its mathematicalfoundation .
In mathematics little is known about the structure ofa general non-Kaehler complex spaces .
However , in the fast-growing developmentof the string theory an abstract models based on the non-Kaehler geometry appearedin the last years .
Such spaces have also additional geometrical propertieswhich makes the study of their mathematical structure more tractable .
Theinvestigation on the project will contribute to the understanding of some of the mathematical problems related to these physical models .
Plant growth , development , and survival depend on the uptake , translocation , and sorting of 15 essential nutrients and countless metabolites to specific organs , cells and intracellular compartments .
However , it is not known how plants regulate and coordinate the complex network of long-distance and cellular transport patterns .
The first complete genome sequence of a plant , large mutant collections , and extensive databases provide opportunities to generate new resources and tools to discover the functions of ~800 transporters in Arabidopsis .
The bulk of unknown transporters are secondary active transporters .
The major objectives of this project are to determine the ion specificity , the tissue and subcellular distribution , and the biological roles of 56 H+-coupled cation transporters , including the CaCA , CPA1 , and CPA2 families .
With the availability of genomic sequence and the identification of transport homologs through bioinformatic analyses , heterologous expression in yeast will be used to quickly delineate the function of the entire complement of H+-coupled cation transporters .
Regulatory mechanisms will be determined by mutation of putative autoinhibitory domains .
Transport in isolated membranes will be used to verify ion specificity of representative transporters .
Tissue and subcellular distribution will be determined using promoter-reporter proteins expression in transgenic plants , and GFP-tagged transporters in a protoplast model .
Biological and physiological functions of transporters will be analyzed using insertional knockout mutants .
New methods and information resulting from the study will be distributed through a site at http//www.cbs.umn.edu/2010 with several updates each year .
To assure that results and resources are available to the community , data will be depositied at TAIR and mutant Arabidopsis lines will be available through the ABRC after results are confirmed.Transporters impact all life processes , including reproduction , metabolism , movement , and responses to hormonal and environmental stimuli , thus resources and information generated from this project will directly facilitate progress towards the goals of the 2010 project .
Programs are in place to attract and provide opportunities for students , including under-represented minorities , to solve problems in health , agriculture , and the environment using experimental and bioinformatic approaches .
This project explores how local newspapers covered members of the House of Representatives during a two-year period .
The project involves searching all editions of the chosen newspapers for any articles , editorials , columns , or letters that mention the selected representatives , coding the items for their content , and analyzing the coded data .
The project is designed to determine whether newspapers report the kinds of information that citizens need to hold representatives accountable for their actions in office .
The assumption is that unbiased and readily available information enhances the prospects for accountability , while incomplete or biased information thwarts it .
The study explores the regularity with which local newspapers report roll-call votes , the extent to which newspapers cover representatives ' other activities , including introducing bills , holding hearings , and building coalitions , and the types of policy issues that attract journalists ' attention .
The project involves collecting four data sets to answer questions about the volume , content , causes , and consequences of newspaper coverage .
It includes ( 1 ) a systematic account of how 25 newspapers covered 25 representatives between January 1 , 1993 , and November 8 , 1994 , in 8,003 articles , editorials , columns , and letters ; ( 2 ) a comparative analysis of how six pairs of newspapers covered six representatives from Boston , Chicago , San Francisco , Seattle , Tucson , and Washington during 1993 and 1994 ; ( 3 ) an analysis of the factors that affected how extensively 67 local newspapers covered 187 representatives during a two-year period , with a data set of 61 ,084 citations ; and ( 4 ) an analysis of how the volume of coverage in local newspapers affected how much citizens knew about their local representatives , achieved by linking the data set of 61 ,084 citations with the 1994 survey conducted by the National Election Studies .
The current proposal is for a project to clean and document these four data sets and prepare them for permanent archiving and public use .
The project is the fIrst systematic study of how newspapers cover individual legislators outside the campaign period .
It is also the first study to examine press coverage for a period longer than a few weeks .
Most previous studies estimated the extent of press coverage for representatives without analyzing the content of coverage .
The project demonstrates the utility of computers for identifying and retrieving articles about representatives from newspaper archives .
All previous studies of how the press covered legislators have required that researchers browse through newspapers searching for articles that mention individual legislators .
This study employs computers to do the browsing .
Computers have the advantage of being more efficient and less error-prone than ordinary labor .
Thus , they permit a vast increase in sample size .
A better understanding of how the press covers representatives ' actions should provide the foundation for a better understanding of citizens ' electoral decisions , representatives ' policy decisions , and the nature of political accountability in a large polity with separated powers and weak political parties .
Reversible protein phosphorylation is the most common mechanism for cellular regulation in eukaryotic systems .
Studies have demonstrated that serine/threonine phosphorylation plays a key role in the regulation of plant physiology and development .
However , tyrosine phosphorylation , despite its overwhelming importance in animals , was largely neglected in higher plants .
Recently the first protein tyrosine phosphatase ( PTP ) has been characterized from higher plants .
Furthermore , a diverse group of 21 genes encoding putative PTPs have been identified from the Arabidopsis genome .
Genetic analyses of 4 PTPs have demonstrated that they serve critical functions in plant development , hormone signaling , and stress responses .
These studies have broken new ground in the understanding of tyrosine phosphorylation in plants and opened up a new area of signal transduction research .
In this project , a multifaceted approach is taken that combines most advanced technology in proteomics and genomics with existing procedures in biochemistry , molecular and cellular biology , and genetics to address the function of tyrosine phosphatases in Arabidopsis .
The cDNAs for all PTPs will isolated , enzymatic properties of these putative PTPs will be characterized , their expression pattern and subcellular localization will be determined , and genetic models will be produced and characterized .
To understand the molecular mechanism underlying PTP function , the in vivo substrates of PTPs will be identified using mass spectrometry .
A useful database on phosphoproteome of Arabidopsis will be built and will be publicly accessible through PlantP website ( http//plantsp.sdsc.edu/ ) .The goal of this project is to understand the function and interplay of all tyrosine phosphatases in plant growth and developmental processes at both whole plant and molecular levels .
Such information will contribute to the overall goal of 2010 program to understand the function of all Arabidopsis genes .
This project will also integrate educational activities into the research program by establishing a summer workshop for high school biology teachers .
NER Oligonucleotide-directed alignment of cytoskeletal filaments for nanoscale assemblyThere is currently great interest in nanoscience and nanotechnology for manipulating material at submicron scales .
In cells , however , this is a routine task -- the transport of intracellular cargo is carried out by motor proteins that move along cytoskeletal filaments called microtubules .
Directional movement is achieved because microtubules have a structural polarity and motors move unidirectionally along them , with different motors moving in different directions .
We seek to ( i ) reconstruct the intracellular transport system in vitro using purified kinesin motor proteins and microtubules , and ( ii ) use it to transport defined cargo ( biological or synthetic nanoscale objects ) to specific sites on a two-dimensional substrate .
To lay down microtubule tracks with desired orientations , we will take advantage of the specificity and reversibility of DNA hybridization as a molecular glue .
Single-stranded DNA oligonucleotides will be attached to defined sites on glass surfaces and complementary oligonucleotides will be covalently attached to microtubules .
By making microtubules whose ends are functionalized with different DNA sequences and spatially patterning their sequence complements , a variety of microtubule geometries will be investigated .
These tracks will be used to direct the motion of cargo-laden kinesin motors as a step towards building systems for biomolecular separations or directed assembly applications .
A one-year study of computer-assisted instruction in the third grade classroom at two urban schools is proposed .
This project will use advanced technology to enhance mathematics and science instruction in elementary classrooms with computer activities that allow students to use the information problem-solving process .
The Benjamin Banneker Project , named for a famous African American mathematician and scientist , involves the design and use of computer software that allows students the opportunity to engage in culturally relevant simulations , and an intelligent tutoring system will monitor their progress .
The main objectives are to design and field-test culturally relevant computer simulations and to provide professional development to support computer usage in the classroom .
To accomplish this goal , the Temple University PI/Co-PI team of mathematics , science , early childhood , and social policy teacher researchers will collaborate with software developers and elementary teachers to carry out this one-year project .
During Phase I two engineers will design the software which will be pilot-tested with third graders .
The software will provide students with grade-level specific simulations and intelligent tutoring .
During Phase II the PI/Co-PI team will provide professional development activities for teachers participating in this study to help them learn how to use software to solve and integrate technology into culturally relevant lessons .
The project will be conducted in two urban , predominantly African American , charter schools .
In Phase III research ( classroom observations ) and project evaluation will occur to measure the effectiveness of the project .
Findings will be reported to refereed journals and presented at conferences .
This project has the potential to hook the interest of African American students by contextualizing mathematics and science computer tasks with the culture of the community .
This project will study databases that are distributed among a set ofsensors that communicate without a fixed network infrastructure .
This architecture is motivated by new types of emerging wireless broadcast networks such as Mobile Ad-hoc Networks , smart dust , and sensor networks .
Smart dust and sensor networks consist of processors that may be the size of a dust particle , and the processors may be sprayed or parachuted from an airplane.Two environments are considered .
In the first one the sensors are static , and in the second one the nodes are mobile , and their locations are not always known.The project will explore the following paradigm , called geographicdissemination of data , for processing queries , triggers and updates .
The paradigm calls for dividing the geographic area into cells .
Each data item in the database is associated with a cell , and resides in that cell , i.e.in the set of processors that are currently located in the cell ( note thatthis set may vary over time ) .
Each cell is considered a node of the distributed database , and queries/triggers/updates are processed by sending them to the appropriate cells .
Note that in contrast to the traditional cellular architecture , the proposed one is infrastructureless .
Prop # 0209400PI William HahnThis award will supply shipboard scientific support equipment for the research vessel Endeavor operated by the University of Rhode Island and dedicated to use in support of marine research .
The Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment Program provides funds for ship equipment deemed essential to the proper and safe conduct of ocean science research .
The Program provides support for such items as deck equipment including winch systems for the deployment and retrieval of scientific instruments , navigational equipment such as radars , gyroscopes and earth satellite receivers to pin point the location of research sites , communication equipment including radio transceivers and satellite transceivers for voice and scientific data communications and other equipment such as motorized workboats for transporting scientists to and from data retrieval sites .
The Project Director , William Hahn is fully qualified to direct this project having had considerable experience in overseeing the acquisition and installation of shipboard equipment .
This project will allow the institution to acquire a pilot computerized maintenance software package to be tested by URI and three other UNOLS institutions .
*** Not Available Not Available Lepreau , JayCCR-0209185 Composable Execution Environments A Foundation for Building Robust Embedded Systems Real-time and embedded systems are built using a wide variety of execution models -- -collections of rules for sequencing actions and mediating access to shared resources .
In general , systems developed using restricted execution models are easier to understand , debug , and test than are systems developed using powerful models .
They are also more efficient and permit stronger properties to be proven about themwith less effort , such as non-violation of timing constraints and freedom from deadlock , livelock , or race conditions.The instantiation of an execution model with a specific set of tasks and their associated timing and resource sharing requirements is called an execution environment .
The central premise of this project is that it is feasible and useful to structure embedded systems as hierarchical compositions of execution environments .
If successful , this research will result in a new way to develop embedded systems software that permits developers to make use of powerful compositions of execution environments without sacrificing the software engineering benefits of individual , more restricted environments.To accomplish this , the researchers must solve a number of research problems .
First , compositions of execution environments must be analyzed and mapped to threads and schedulers in such a way that noreal-time deadlines or other constraints of the individual environments are violated .
This will be accomplished by leveraging the researchers ' experience with hierarchical real-time scheduling , withconstraint checking for component systems , and with flexible execution models in operating systems .
Second , compositions of execution environments must not suffer from undue or unexpected degrees of inefficiency and unpredictability .
The researchers will accomplish this by leveraging their experience in developing and optimizing component-based operating systems .
0209886EllwoodDescription This award is to support a collaborative project between Dr. Brooks Ellwood , Department of Geology and Geophysics at Louisiana State University , Baton Rouge , Louisiana and Dr. Aziz Kafafy , Geology Department , Tanta University , Tanta , Egypt .
The investigators plan to study the correlation of Cretaceous rock sequences exposed along the Gulf of Suez margin in Egypt and in the North American mid continent .
Using the magnetosusceptibility event and cyclostratigraphy ( MSEC ) method , they will use samples collected from both regions to build a composite MSEC standard that may be used for correlation between the two regions .
Recent published MSEC data sets have been shown to be useful for global correlation and correlation between wells when applied to cutting samples .
Scope The Cretaceous Period , especially in the Middle East , is a significant geologic period in terms of applied geology .
MSEC correlation in cretaceous Rocks from Egypt and the United States is a logical progression from Paleozoic studies .
This will advance knowledge and refine stratigraphic correlation of Cretaceous strata in northern Africa and the western United States , complementing and giving independent evidence for correlations within biozones and polar reversal intervals .
The research has direct application to studies of Cretaceous strata , which hold petroleum resources in the United States and elsewhere , and the results may have direct application in oil exploration .
Ellwood and Kafafy have experience in MSEC techniques and in applications in the field .
The project includes undergraduate students who will benefit from taking part in an international cooperative research .
This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program , which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative activities .
The long term goal of this project is to develop a dynamicaltheory of how neurons in primary visual cortex ( V1 ) generate atuned response to multiple ( rather than single ) features of avisual stimulus , and how these responses are spatially integratedacross the cortex to generate more global information about avisual scene .
A primary focus of the work is to extend currentnetwork models of orientation tuning to incorporate the fact thatV1 cells are also selective for spatial frequency .
This ismotivated by the considerable physiological and psychophysicalevidence suggesting that cortical circuits carry out a localizedtwo-dimensional Fourier decomposition of a stimulus rather thansimply performing local edge detection .
Optical imaging of thesurface of cortex has revealed an intricate relationship betweenthe distribution of orientation and spatial frequency preferencesacross cortex .
How correlations between these two featurepreference maps is manifested by the local and long-rangecircuitry of V1 , and the consequences for the large-scaledynamics of V1 is also investigated .
The primary visual cortex ( V1 ) located at the back of thebrain is the first cortical area to process visual informationreceived from the eyes .
One of the classical results regardingthe function of neurons ( brain cells ) in V1 is that they analyzevery local features of a visual image , that is , they carry outimage decomposition .
( For example , V1 cells are sensitive to theorientation of an edge representing the boundary between a lightand dark region of the image .
This discovery by Hubel and Wieselled to the Nobel prize in medicine ) .
A very important questionthat follows from this is how our coherent perception of theworld is reconstructed .
Until recently , it was thought that thelocal information from cells in V1 was passed through higherorder processing stages in the brain where cognition occurs.However , it is becoming clear that long-range circuitry within V1could itself contribute to the process of reconstruction .
Thebasic aim of the proposal is to investigate this process bydeveloping a large-scale mathematical model of primary visualcortex that incorporates the latest anatomical data regarding itsinternal circuitry .
Understanding how early stages in the visualbrain encode images has important applications to informationtechnology ( such as the development of artificial vision systems ) and biotechnology ( such as the development of an artificialprosthesis for the visually impaired ) .
In the latter case itmight be possible one day to artificially stimulate primaryvisual cortex to induce a visual sensation , rather like acontrolled visual hallucination .
0209514BellaachiaDescription This project supports a U.S.-Morocco workshop on information technology to be held in Rabat , Morocco June 2002 .
The U.S. organizer is Dr. Abdelghani Bellaachia , Professor in the Department of Computer Science , George Washington University , Washington , D.C .
The Moroccan co-organizer is Dr. Said Belcadi , Director , Scientific Research and Cooperation ( CNCPRST ) , Ministry of Higher Education and Scientific Research , Rabat , Morocco .
The workshop will cover topics in the following areas bioinformatics , e-commerce , internet/networking , software engineering , telecomputing/telemedicine , and wireless communications .
It is hoped that the presentations and discussions will lead to identifications of areas of cooperative research of mutual interest to the two countries.Scope This project will likely open avenues for collaboration in information technology research , an important area for the United States and for many of the developing countries , such as Morocco , where there is a need to accelerate the development in that area and to reap benefits in many applications such as in education , communications and in industrialization .
The U.S. team that Dr. Bellaachia has assembled is composed of eminent and experienced scientists .
The Government of Morocco has strongly endorsed the workshop .
Funding for the project is provided by the Office of International Science and Engineering and the Division of Advanced Networking Infrastructure and Research .
This is a Small Grant for Exploratory Research.Dr .
Lawrence will pursue recent preliminary evidence of a novel nuclear domain or body , which typically positions immediately adjacent to PML bodies and appears to form a doublet structure with the PML body .
In recent years , there has been increasing appreciation for the complexity and importance of internal nuclear structures and growing evidence of their fundamental roles in diverse nuclear functions .
At the forefront has been intense interest in PML bodies ( also called ND10 , PODs , or PML domains ) , because these structures are enriched for a collection of important gene regulatory proteins .
Dr. Lawrence 's laboratory has been studying the characterization of distinct nuclear compartments and their structural and functional relationship to gene expression .
In the course of her very recent work she fortuitously uncovered evidence that there exists an essentially unknown and uncharacterized nuclear body that is structurally linked to PML bodies .
The evidence for this is at a very preliminary state , and there are major questions to be sorted out in order to establish conclusively the existence of this as a bona fide nuclear body containing multiple nuclear factors and having defined structure .
The potential significance of the work is that it may demonstrate a previously unknown part of cell structure , the equivalent of a nuclear organelle with an unexplored role in basic nuclear function .
In addition , these bodies are structurally coupled with a body that is clearly implicated in cell cycle regulation .
Dr. Lawrence and her colleagues initially discovered a regularly spaced pattern of ~10-20 very bright nuclear dots ( immediately abutting but not overlapping PML bodies ) using an antibody to the FLAG-epitope in cells engineered to express flag-tagged c-myc oncoprotein at physiological levels .
However , recent evidence suggests that the antigen detected is probably not the myc oncoprotein but rather an endogenous protein , possibly induced as part of a cellular reaction to MuLV virus ( murine leukemia virus ) .
The first aim is to investigate the hypothesis that PML-associated bodies indeed exist and are found in a variety of cells , using both ultrastructural analysis and immunofluorescence to several other specific proteins that prior evidence suggests may co-localize to these bodies .
Second , she will investigate the relationship between MuLV vectors or MuLV expression and the induction of the relevant protein and/or body .
Depending on results , it would also be feasible to identify an unknown cellular protein detected by the anti-flag antibodies and localized to these structures .
This award provides partial support for the 2002 Gordon Research Conference Research at High Pressure , June 23-28 , Kimball Union Academy , Meriden , NH .
This interdisciplinary Conference addresses new developments in fields such as physics , chemistry , earth and planetary science , materials science , and biology .
Recent advances in high-pressure methods have led to the creation of new materials , and to opportunities to study physical , chemical and biological processes under high-pressure conditions .
The Conference will feature invited talks in exciting new areas such as shock wave techniques , materials syntheses , high pressure liquids , nanomaterials , high pressure biochemistry , sampling the deep Earth , new synchrotron and neutron experiments , high-pressure superconductivity , and new metallic behavior at high pressure .
Opening and closing sessions will feature provocative talks to provide challenges and opportunities for theory and experiment in high pressure research .
The NSF funding will facilitate participation by students and junior scientists , as well as newcomers to the high-pressure field .
The Conference is supported by the Condensed Matter Physics Program , the Solid State Chemistry Program , and the Petrology and Geochemistry Program .
The goals of this research program are to further understanding of electrostatic contributions to the stability and function of proteins .
Electrostatics is the most useful correlator of structure and function in biological macromolecules , especially in proteins .
Without deep understanding of the contributions of electrostatics , the computational methods that are needed to bridge the gap between structure and energy of proteins can not be improved , nor can the structural basis of stability and function of proteins be established .
To accomplish these goals , two sets of experimental studies will be carried out .
One set will address the relationship between the dynamic character of proteins and their electrostatic properties .
To understand how local structural fluctuations modulate pKa values , the pKa of Asp and Glu residues in staphylococcal nuclease will be measured by NMR spectroscopy .
The pKa values will also be used to analyze the acid unfolding of nuclease with an ensemble-based computational method that has the potential to describe a ligand-linked structural transition at unprecedented level of detail .
Global conformational changes will be studied by measurement of the Stokes radii of the native and denatured ensemble with size-exclusion chromatography .
The goal of the second set of studies is to elucidate the determinants of the energetics of short-range electrostatic interactions .
A cluster of ionizable and polar residues in staphylococcal nuclease will be studied systematically .
The approach entails perturbation of interactions with mutagenesis , crystallography to obtain structures , NMR to measure pKa values , and measurements of stability by chemical and temperature denaturation .
A central goal of this research is to develop computational tools for structure-based calculation of electrostatic energy and pKa values .
The experimental studies will contribute the physical insight needed to guide the improvement of computational models , and provide the data needed to test these methods .
To the extent that the concepts and computational tools that emerge from these studies have a direct bearing on problems in protein engineering , in rational , structure-driven design , and in biotechnology , they will have a deep and broad impact on society .
A grant has been awarded to Dr. Thomas Demere at the San Diego Natural History Museum ( SDNHM ) to study the fossil record of baleen whales and to document the dramatic anatomical modifications that members of this group have undergone over the past 35 million years .
Given the popular interest in living baleen whales , it is surprising that we still lack a clear understanding of the genealogical relationships of the modern species .
It is also surprising that the baleen whale family tree is so poorly resolved , with many fossil branches based on rather sketchy evidence or , even worse , currently unknown .
Dr. Demere 's study will include descriptions of critical new fossil specimens , a re-analysis of named fossil baleen whale specimens housed at foreign and domestic museums , and determination of specific anatomical features that document the evolutionary changes that have occurred to the baleen whale skull , lower jaw , arm , and body .
This study will be conducted within the context of a broader collaborative study of baleen whale evolution .
The broader study will include analysis of genealogical relationships of all living species of baleen whales using data derived from molecular studies , soft anatomical studies , and osteological studies .
When these results are combined with those based on the fossil record , the outcome will provide the most comprehensive view yet realized of the evolutionary history of baleen whales .
A final aspect of this collaborative research will be to utilize the vastly improved genealogical history of baleen whales to track the anatomical and functional changes that occurred during the development of the diverse feeding styles exhibited by the modern species ( i.e. , surface skimming right whales , engulfment feeding fin whales , and suction feeding gray whales ) .
Highlights of this research will be incorporated into public education efforts at SDNHM including website pages ( www.sdnhm.org ) and exhibit galleries .
Differences between male and female brains and behavior result primarily from differences in the timing , level and location of gene expression .
Even in species where sex is determined chromosomally and the gonads play central roles in the differentiation process , the exact nature of gene expression is influenced by a host of environmental influences ranging from nutrition to social interactions .
Although we are building a solid understanding of how gonadal steroids influence the sexual differentiation of brain and behavior , the mechanisms by which social interactions affect this process remain poorly understood .
This project develops an integrative approach to how gene expression in the brain changes during sexual differentiation , in a model system where it is possible to experimentally dissect gonadal and social influences that regulate behavior .
A well-studied reef fish species , the bluehead wrasse , exhibits socially-controlled functional sex change .
When local dominant males are removed , a large female changes into a male , and even gonadectomized females change to male behavioral phenotypes .
The challenge is to identify those neural genes from the brain relevant to the behavior that are differentially expressed , between females that do not change sex and those that are induced to change sex in their natural environment .
This project has a focus on developing the molecular technology to successfully approach that question , to first identify some of the relevant genes that then can be targeted to look for changes in expression during the behavioral change .
Results will be important for further developing this system as a good genetic model to understand the neural basis of sexually dimorphic behavior .
The impact of this work will extend beyond neuroscience to animal behavior , to psychology , and to potential use in aquaculture and fish breeding .
In addition , the project continues excellent field and laboratory training for students in an interesting project integrating animal behavior , endocrinology and molecular biology .
Shaul Mukamel of U. Rochester and Rudy Marcus of Caltech are supported by the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program for a Summer School for graduate students and post-doctoral fellows , where instructors will lecture on many-body techniques in chemical physics .
The 12-day school will be administered through the Gordon Research Conference office .
Lectures will emphasize physically motivated approximations , connections to current experiments , and transferability of mathematical methods to other , quite different problems.The main goals of the school are to expose students to tutorials in targeted subdisciplines of chemical physics , familiarize them with state-of-the-art techniques in greater depth than normal course work , and allow them to become acquainted with peers at other institutions at the early stages of their careers .
With National Science Foundation support , Dr. Lawrence Barsalou will conduct three years of basic research .
The funded project will examine the knowledge that underlies typical high-level cognitive activities such as human discourse , reasoning , or perception .
The hypotheses that guide this research are quite new .
The key assumption is that high level , abstract , cognitive activities are actually grounded in the situated everyday workings of the body-thus the terms situated cognition or embodied cognition .
For example , our knowledge of cars reflects how we interact with cars , what it is like to actually drive a car ; to see , hear , touch , and smell a real car ; or to feel an emotional response to a car .
This view contrasts with a tradition in psychology , whereby our knowledge of the world is assumed to be fully abstract and detached-something like the centralized one-kind-of-knowledge-structure-fits-all way in which a computer program can be written .
The funded research will test predictions derived from the new alternative .
Human participants will perform classic knowledge tasks , responding to questions such as What are the properties of a car ?
or Is a tire a property of a car ? .
Carefully-controlled laboratory experiments have been designed around such questions and tasks to assess whether situated and embodied forms of knowledge are used to perform them.This research has broad implications .
First , support for its working hypotheses would motivate big changes in basic scientific theories of human knowledge ; this work could contribute to a fundamental shift in how we think about ourselves .
Second , the outcomes of this research could have broad applied impact in education ( i.e. , how best to teach a knowledge domain ) or cognitive engineering ( i.e. , how machines should be designed to best interact with human beings ) .
Finally , this work may suggest new forms of artificial intelligence .
Intelligent machines that use situated knowledge , shaped around their peripheral devices , are more robust than traditional centralized intelligent machines .
Possible new machines could resemble the robots used in exploration of Mars , for example , a second-generation of robots that better situate themselves in their environments .
Multicellular development depends on cell-cell signaling and the consequences of this dialogue between cells , which are often large-scale changes in gene expression .
Hence , a fundamental goal of developmental biologists is to determine how cell-cell signals orchestrate global changes in gene transcription .
The multicellular nature of the Myxococcus xanthus developmental cycle makes it an excellent model system for studying this basic problem in developmental biology .
During M. xanthus development , large groups of cells migrate to focal points and begin constructing a multicellular structure called a fruiting body .
Once the fruiting body is molded into its final form , cells inside this structure differentiate into dormant , stress-resistant spores .
Many M. xanthus genes are developmentally regulated , and cell-cell signaling is required for the temporal expression of these genes .
However , what happens between production of these cell-cell signals and transcription of developmental genes has remained relatively uncharted territory .
This project focuses on a family of proteins that play a prominent role in regulating these coordinated changes in gene expression , the NtrC family of transcriptional activators .
It has been proposed that M. xanthus uses a series of NtrC-like proteins to activate expression of specific sets of genes at specific times in development ; seven different NtrC-like activators that are required for development have been uncovered .
Using genetic and biochemical approaches , this research project will examine the role that NtrC-like activators play in orchestrating developmental gene expression in M. xanthus .
The control of reproduction is fundamental to the structure and evolution of animal societies .
This project will examine the causes and consequences of variation in the breeding structure of colonies of the termite Nasutitermes corniger , focusing on the number of reproductive males and females ( kings and queens ) and their apportionment of reproduction .
The wide range of colony genetic structures present within natural populations provides opportunities to test hypotheses arising from the rapidly growing body of theory on reproductive partitioning in social groups .
Nest dissections , behavioral assays , and analysis of a highly informative set of genetic markers will determine ( 1 ) how reproduction is partitioned among co-occurring queens and kings , ( 2 ) how colony genetic structure affects interactions within and between groups , and ( 3 ) how colony reproductive characteristics change through time .
Despite their ecological and economic importance , termites are understudied relative to other social insects .
Nasutitermes corniger is particularly well suited to the proposed research due to its abundance and to the comparative ease with which the queens and kings can be collected from mature colonies .
Besides adding to knowledge of fundamental aspects of termite biology , this research will contribute to the broader understanding of social behavior , reproductive competition , and the genetic structure of populations .
Floral scent plays a vital role in the reproductive cycle of higher plants by attracting pollinators to flowers .
The long-term goal of this research is to fill important gaps in our knowledge of biochemical pathways leading to the formation of floral volatiles and the molecular mechanisms controlling their accumulation and release in plants .
Although monoterpenes , the C10 members of the terpenoid family of natural products , are very common constituents of floral scent , little is known about how floral tissues regulate their developmental and rhythmic emission .
This project will focus on investigation of the role of geranyl pyrophosphate ( GPP ) , the key precursor of monoterpene biosynthesis , in the regulation of developmental and rhythmic emission of trans-b-ocimene and myrcene , the two major scent components of snapdragon scent .
GPP , the starting point leading to the synthesis of many monoterpene end products , is the result of condensation of dimethylallyl diphosphate and isopentenyl diphosphate ( IPP ) in a reaction catalyzed by GPP synthase ( GPPS ) .
Plant cells have two different IPP biosynthetic pathways located in two different compartments .
Biochemical pathway ( s ) leading to GPP biosynthesis in snapdragon petal tissue will be elucidated and the possibility of compensation of one pathway by the other one through the exchange between cytosolic and plastidic IPP pools will be examined .
In contrast to other homodimeric short-chain prenyltransferases , GPPS is a functional heterodimer in which small and large subunits are absolutely required for enzymatic activity .
In this project , the complexity of the GPPS gene family in snapdragon will be characterized , the role of both subunits of GPPS in the regulation of the amount of GPP in cells will be analyzed and the involvement of subcellular localization in the regulation of GPPS activity will be determined .
Floral scent plays an important role in the crop economy since one-third of our total diet depends upon insect-pollinated plants including most fruit trees , berries , nuts , oilseeds , and vegetables .
Pollination not only affects crop yield but also quality and efficiency of crop production .
This research will result in new insights into the regulation of floral scent production in higher plants and also provide the knowledge for engineering plants with improved scent quality .
This could increase the attraction of flowers to certain pollinators and lead to the more efficient pollination of crop plants cultivated for their seed , forage , or food value .
Atmospheric deposition of nitrogen to temperate forests has increased in recent decades as a result of increased combustion of fossil fuels .
Knowing how nitrogen in air pollution is retained within forests will improve the ability of scientists to anticipate interactions among efforts to mitigate human alterations of regional and global cycles of carbon and nitrogen .
For example , the way that forests retain nitrogen affects the ability of forests to help mitigate expected global warming due to increased carbon gases in the atmosphere .
Because nitrogen often limits rates of plant growth , increased nitrogen inputs could affect forest growth and health .
Most of the additional nitrogen deposited onto the forest from air pollution is retained in the soil rather than being taken up by plants .
The biological and chemical processes whereby this incoming nitrogen , dominantly in the form of nitrate , is converted to organically-bound forms that stay in the soil remains unknown .
Recent evidence suggests that abiotic reactions ( chemical reactions without participation of living organisms ) convert nitrate into organic nitrogen in soil .
This suggestion challenges a widely held view that microorganisms living in the soils are the dominant agents for nitrogen uptake in soil .
This abiotic reaction of nitrate is particularly perplexing because the energetics of nitrate reduction in soils are not favorable under normal conditions of well-drained soils .
The fate of the organically bound nitrogen once it gets into the soils is also largely unknown .
For example , it is not known how much organic nitrogen is eventually converted back into an inorganic form that plants can use .
The proposed studies will be among the first to investigate the fate of dissolved organic nitrogen , which is increasingly recognized as central to the nitrogen cycle of many forests .
The experiments use two ongoing nitrogen addition experiments in the Harvard Forest of central Massachusetts and the Howland Forest of central Maine .
The first objective is to measure reactions of nitrate in these forest soils that have received nitrogen additions experimentally .
The PI 's seek to determine whether nitrogen addition has changed the capacity of soils to react with nitrate , either biotically or abiotically .
The PI 's also present in this proposal the ferrous wheel hypothesis , that reduced forms of iron in tiny pockets of poorly aerated soil can reduce nitrate to another form of nitrogen , nitrite , which can then react with dissolved organic carbon in the soils to form dissolved organic nitrogen .
The second objective is to test this hypothesis in several laboratory experiments , where the concentrations and combinations of hypothesized reactants are varied systematically in a laboratory instrument , called a redox-pH-stat reactor , which controls the acidity and aeration of the soil sample during the incubation .
As a result of its interdisciplinary nature , the research requires the collaborative efforts of an ecologist ( Davidson ) , a chemist ( Chorover ) and a microbiologist ( Dail ) , all of whom specialize in the study of soils .
Sox-domain and Homeodomain proteins CoordinateRegulation of DV patterning of the Drosophila Nervous System.The elucidation of the molecular pathways that regulate the development of the central nervous system is critical to our understanding of nervous system formation and function .
In humans , defects in neuronal development and function lead to a wide variety of congenital as well as inherited neurological diseases .
The genetic and molecular events that regulate CNS development are just now being explored in vertebrate and invertebrate model systems .
Initial insights from this work demonstrate a remarkable conservation of structure , expression and function between Drosophila genes expressed in the developing CNS and their vertebrate/mammalian homologs .
These studies support the idea that the fundamental architecture of many biological processes are conserved between flies and humans .
The focus of this grant is to elucidate the molecular basis of CNS patterning in the early Drosophila embryo .
Specifically , the expression and function of a set of evolutionarily conserved transcription factors , collectively referred to as the columnar genes/proteins , subdivides the early Drosophila CNS into three longitudinal domains from which distinct neuronal populations arise .
In order to understand how these proteins partition the developing CNS into distinct domains it is essential to identify regulatory targets of the columnar proteins and to elucidate how the columnar proteins act at the molecular level to regulate the regions specific expression of these genes .
However to date , no such target genes have been identified .
This proposal focuses on the identification of direct regulatory targets of the columnar genes and on the dissection of the regulatory regions of these genes in order to provide an initial glimpse into the molecular mechanisms that pattern the early CNS in the Drosophila embryo .
Of note , the Drosophila columnar genes and their mammalian counterparts perform nearly identical roles during the initial patterning of the Drosophila and mammalian early CNS , respectively .
Thus , it is likely that the clarification of the molecular mechanisms through which these transcription factors regulate pattern in the Drosophila CNS will have far reaching implications for our understanding of CNS development in mammals .
This project brings together a team of ecologists and physiologists to investigate how physiological mechanisms constrain the evolution of parental investment and self-maintenance in tropical and temperate environments .
Life-history theory predicts that long-lived organisms should allocate more resources to enhancing survival , thereby protecting future reproduction , at the expense of current reproduction .
Many of the predicted responses of physiology and behavior are controlled by endocrine and immune system mechanisms that establish incompatible physiological states and limit individual responses of organisms and evolved responses of populations .
This collaborative study will compare related species of birds living in contrasting tropical and temperate environments to determine population parameters ( adult survival and reproductive rate ) and physiological and behavioral responses .
Incorporating a strongly developed student-training component in the project , measurements will include activity , metabolism , health status , and endocrine profiles in the field , and metabolism , hormonal stress response , and immune system response in the laboratory .
Analysis and interpretation of these data will relate variation in life-history attributes to phylogenetic relationship , region , and ecological measures of habitat , diet , and predator environment .
This project is unique in that it integrates studies in ecology , physiology , and demography to focus on major patterns of diversification of life histories .
The proposed work seeks to create a new way to educate prospective engineers .
This idea is founded on the concepts of an enriched learning environment , which is a system of education that provides an interconnected focus on the learner , on the teaching process , on discipline knowledge and on the community .
Specific aims are to1 .
Create a change process that leads faculty towards the ideas embodied in the enrichedlearning environment model .
This task will involve a set of ongoing workshops ( 2-4 peryear ) facilitated by specialists in faculty development .
Workshops will be interdisciplinary with participation from disciplines such as engineering , education , mathematics , and English.2 .
Create a mentor program , organized in tiers .
A professor mentors a limited number ofexperienced mentors , each an undergraduate .
Experienced mentors supervise beginningmentors , and the mentors guide students in engineering classes.3 .
Design and build a creativity incubator , the Idaho Mind Works .
Patterned after the highly successful Idaho Engineering Works ( IEWorks ) , the Idaho Mind Works will be located in a physical space that promotes social , cultural and experiential learning.4 .
Implement the enriched learning environment model in engineering science , lab and design classes.5 .
Gather validated evidence that informs the relevant scientific and educational communities of the results of this research.This project will create a prototype of a new engineering education system-one that is based on new assumptions and foundations .
Knowledge will be documented and disseminated , including transfer to an innovative company that specializes in faculty development.Intellectual Merit .
While ideas of the enriched learning environment have been achieved in some classrooms , this proposal seeks change across a community of educators .
The proposed objectives are each an extension of significant ongoing work , and the project team contains engineering educators , assessment specialists and personnel from the College of Education .
Through commitment from faculty and students across disciplines , the proposed work will create an environment based on inquiry , investigation , and discovery , where faculty and students learn and research together .
In addition , the proposal team seeks to reduce the cost of education and to develop a method for transferring the enriched learning environment model to other universities.To improve quality while decreasing costs is the way of the engineer -- this proposal is founded on the belief that this is possible .
The importance of legume plants to nitrogen budgets of many natural and agricultural ecosystems depends largely on their interactions with rhizobia , soil bacteria that can live inside root nodules and convert nitrogen gas into fixed nitrogen that their plant host can use .
Rhizobia vary in costs and benefits to their hosts .
Why do many , but not all , rhizobia use plant photosynthate ( carbohydrates ) to fix nitrogen that mainly benefits their hosts , rather than hoarding that photosynthate to support their own future survival and reproduction ?
This is especially puzzling since each plant typically hosts several competing strains of rhizobia .
Strains that fix nitrogen may increase host photosynthesis , thereby increasing the pool of available photosynthate , but if all strains share in this collective benefit then selfish strains that hoard photosynthate should displace those that fix more nitrogen .
Why has n't this happened ?
Preliminary data appear to show that plants can monitor individual root nodules and cut off resources ( including oxygen ) to those that fix little or no nitrogen .
Mathematical models show that such plant sanctions would be an effective deterrent to rhizobial cheating , but additional research is needed on the mechanisms of plant sanctions and on their effects on survival and reproduction of rhizobia .
Various experiments will expose some nodules to a nitrogen-free atmosphere , while allowing other nodules on the same plant to fix nitrogen .
Noninvasive monitoring of nodule physiology and methods to count rhizobia are working well , and we also plan to measure resource levels in rhizobia .
The importance to soil populations of rhizobial release from nodules , relative to increased reproduction of rhizobia already in the soil , will be determined using rhizobia expressing two different fluorescence genes .
DNA fingerprinting of rhizobia collected from nodules in the field will test the key hypothesis that mixed nodules ( containing two or more strains ) are rare .
Although details will differ , our research may be relevant to any system in which cooperation can break down , such as expulsion of algae by bleaching corals .
Circadian rhythms are cyclic biological activities that recur at the same time every day .
In mammals , a part of the brain called the suprachiasmatic nucleus ( SCN ) is important for these rhythms , and constitutes part of the biological clock mechanism .
These rhythms continue to run under constant conditions , but environmental cues such as timing of daylight can set , or entrain , the timing or phase-shifting of the cycles .
Sex differences have been described in the entrained circadian rhythms of most mammals that have been examined , and recent data suggest that steroid hormones can influence the function of the circadian clock biochemistry in the SCN .
Most animals used for circadian research are nocturnal rodents , but there are some data on two diurnal species , the human and a rodent called the degu .
In the degu , sexually dimorphic circadian effects are seen in responses to free-running periods , light stimuli , and modulation by hormones , among other factors .
The sexual dimorphism develops just after puberty , and appears to require changes in both sexes .
This project uses biochemical , molecular and behavioral approaches to determine whether sexual differentiation occurs when molecular receptors for estrogen and/or androgen are up-regulated in the SCN , and whether sexual differentiation of circadian rhythms is reflected in changed cycles of the gene expression of key cellular proteins ( PER and CRY ) that generate the cycles .
Results from this project will be important for general biology and psychology as well as neuroendocrinology , for understanding hormonal and genetic mechanisms of circadian rhythms in mammals , for evolutionary comparisons with nocturnal mammals , and potentially for better understanding of how human circadian rhythms develop during adolescence .
This project is also in a laboratory with an excellent record of research mentoring .
0212719Hodge Few studies have been conducted to test species limits in fungi used in insect biocontrol programs .
One such group of ascomycete fungi is the Hypocrella and Aschersonia group , the former with sexual , ascospore producing phases and the latter with only or usually asexual spore forming phases , but shown with recent DNA sequence data to be likely close relatives of various sexual Hypocrella species .
These fungi mostly infect Homoptera insects , usually scale insects and whiteflies , and some were used early in the 1900s to control pests of citrus groves in Florida .
The taxonomic boundaries between species and the linkages between sexual and asexual forms remain poorly studied , which in turn has limited the development of improved biocontrol agents .
Dr. Kathie Hodge of Cornell University will work with graduate students there to analyze species relationships in the critical Aschersonia aleyrodis and A. goldiana complex , with a focus on integrating data from morphology , mating trials , and multi-gene sequences to establish species circumscriptions that reflect biological properties of the organisms while providing practical tools for rapid identification from observable phenotypic features .
Taxonomic data will be gathered from existing herbarium specimens and laboratory cultures , and from material newly collected during field work in Florida and elsewhere , augmented with material provided by colleagues around the world .
New taxonomic identification resources and keys will be generated .
Evolutionary relationships will be assessed through phylogenetic analyses of morphological characters and of DNA sequence data obtained from several nuclear ribosomal and protein-coding genes .
A graduate student will be trained in collecting techniques and in modern phylogenetic systematics .
Publications and Internet-based resources will be generated to transmit the results of the work to other biologists and to the public .
Procellariiform seabirds ( the petrels , albatrosses and shearwaters ) make their living foraging over vast expanses of open ocean hunting patchily distributed prey such as fish , squid and krill .
The secret to their success is an ability to locate prey by smell .
Over the past decade , much headway has been made in understanding olfactory foraging of Antarctic species , both at large ( > 100s of miles ) and small ( < 10 miles ) scales .
Augmenting early work by leading scientists , the Principal Investigator 's ( PI ) broadly integrative approach to studying olfactory foraging has expanded the picture of how seabirds see the world with their noses.Now many questions arise .
For example , how do olfactory foraging behaviors develop in chicks ?
While other pelagic seabirds spend months teaching offspring how and where to forage , procellariiform chicks fledge and survive the open seas weeks after their parents have dispersed .
These birds appear to hatch knowing how and where to forage without aid or instruction from a parent .
How is this possible ?
Drawing from disciplines as diverse as atmospheric chemistry and developmental neurobiology , this proposal explores the hypothesis that , during development , chicks become tuned to odors used in foraging by being exposed to them by their parents .
This pre-tuning or imprinting provides birds with information about the olfactory landscape they will encounter after fledging , and , specifically , offers them clues about where foraging is likely to be productive.This proposal investigates the development of olfactory sensitivity in the Leach 's storm petrel ( Oceanodroma leucorhoa ) .
There are two primary objectives .
First , chicks ' behavioral responses to three prey-related odors ( DMS - plankton scent , pyrazine - krill scent , and trimethyl amine - fish scent ) and to one control odor ( phenyl ethyl alcohol - rose scent ) will be characterized .
The second objective will determine whether chicks learn odor cues by pre-exposing chicks to a non-prey related odor during the egg stage , and then testing whether this early exposure increases sensitivity to that odor later in life.Results from the proposed research will be among the first to address the development of olfaction in an ecologically important context .
In addition to her seabird work , the PI has been a key player in developing new and highly integrative approaches to studying salmon imprinting , so extending these ideas to birds is a logical progression of her work .
Overall , the results will greatly extend our knowledge of the sensory biology of these fascinating birds .
Such knowledge not only is useful to basic science , but also may help bolster efforts to ensure the conservation of procellariiforms , given the threatened or endangered status of many species .
Moreover , by establishing a study site at a University-sponsored field laboratory , student involvement in the work will be much more easily fostered .
Relative to the remote sub-Antarctic , where virtually all of the PI 's previous work has been conducted , Kent Island ( New Brunswick , Canada ) is easily and economically accessible .
The location also provides access to lab facilities ( not typically available on isolated islands where procellariiforms breed ) and collaborators from around the world , as well as the ability to mentor graduate and undergraduate students in the field .
Accurate potential energy functions for polypeptide chains have two important uses .
For spectroscopy , they provide the means to calculate reliable normal mode frequencies of peptides and proteins for fundamental analyses of structure and interactions from infrared and Raman spectra .
For molecular mechanics ( MM ) and dynamics ( MD ) studies , they provide the physical accuracy needed for reliable predictions of structures , energies , and dynamics of proteins .
Current standard functions do not meet such standards since they give spectroscopically poor reproduction of vibrational frequencies .
Using a method developed in his laboratory , called a spectroscopically determined force field ( SDFF ) , such deficiencies have been overcome .
The goal of this project is to determine and incorporate into an SDFF for the polypeptide chain those components of an MM energy function that will give it the needed accuracy for reliable simulations of proteins .
Polarizability will be fully included in the SDFF , based on a recently developed electrostatic model for this property of polar groups .
Structural features of the peptide group that depend on pyramidalization at the nitrogen atom will be further elucidated and parameterized .
These include the explicit incorporation of charge fluxes , i.e. , the dependence of charge on conformation , which are also essential to computing reliable infrared band intensities .
Previous studies of typical N-H ... O hydrogen bonds will be extended to include C-H ... O hydrogen bonds , which have recently been found to be important in protein structures .
SDFF descriptions of O-H ... O hydrogen bonding in water and alcohols will be developed.The results of this research will have broad scientific and educational impacts .
The ability to more reliably calculate structural and energetic , as well as spectroscopic , characteristics of proteins will lead to more accurate predictions of their properties .
This will lead to deeper insights into functions of these biologically important molecules .
The developments from this research will be disseminated to the scientific community , will result in the advanced training of graduate students and postdocs , and will be reflected in curricular themes in undergraduate courses , thus contributing to the integration of research and education .
This project is supported by the Molecular Biophysics Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Division of Physics in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate .
This project concerns how cells regulate intracellular membrane trafficking , including the formation of intracellular vesicles by budding from larger intracellular membrane compartments , movement of vesicles from one region of the cell to another , and the fusion of intracellular membrane compartments with one another .
Rab GTPases play a multitude of roles in vesicular transport , including regulation of vesicle formation , vesicle motility , vesicle tethering , membrane fusion and membrane remodeling .
Rab GDP dissociation inhibitor ( GDI ) is a protein that binds to rabs , keeping rab in the GDP-bound state , as well as delivering and placing rabs in the correct membrane compartment .
The mechanism for releasing rab from GDI and delivering the rab to the correct membrane is unknown and is likely to involve proteins that bind and interact with GDI .
Dr. Cheney 's laboratory and collaborators have previously cloned the Drosophila GDI gene , determined the Drosophila GDI crystal structure , isolated and characterized Drosophila GDI mutations and located the GDI mutations within the GDI crystal structure ( Ricard et al. , 2001 ) .
Prior work supported by NSF ( # 9874626 , RUI Proteins that control interaction of rab GTPases and GDIls ) resulted in the discovery of candidate proteins that interact with GDI and potentially could regulate the release of rab from GDI .
The research that will be conducted under this award will extend this project by further characterizing the interacting proteins and investigating the nature of their interaction with GDI and role in rab delivery .
The prior work has isolated a 30 kD protein that bound to mutant , but not wild-type , GDI in a GST-GDI pulldown assay .
This protein could be GDI displacement factor ( GDF ) or a rab .
The prior work has also discovered 14 genomic regions that interact genetically with a GDI null allele .
These regions include Myosin V , Myosin VIIa , rab26 , Mp20/Calponin , and commissureless .
Finally , this prior work has isolated 6 mutations that interact with GDI .
The aims of the current project are1 , to identify the 30 kD protein and determine whether it triggers rab release from GDI to membranes ; 2 , to find the candidate gene in ech of 4 interacting genomic regions and determine if the candidate gene product binds to GDI , affecting rab release from GDI ; and 3 , to clone the genes for one mutation that interacts with GDI and determine if the protein encoded by this gene binds directly to GDI , affecting in rab release.This research will investigate proteins that interact with GDI and will shed light on how rab is released from GDI and delivered correctly to membrane compartments .
Further , this project will integrally and actively involve undergraduates in an exciting area of research .
Long-chain fatty acids are important substrates for energy production and macromolecular biosynthesis and are important regulatory molecules .
The transport of fatty acids into the cell represents an important metabolic process common to most bacterial and animal systems .
The most well understood fatty acid transport process is found in the gram-negative bacterium bacteria , Escherichia coli .
In E. coli , long-chain fatty acids are taken up by a process that is linked to utilization and fatty acid-dependent gene expression .
This process requires the fatty acid transport protein FadL and the enzyme fatty acyl CoA synthetase ( FACS ) .
FadL functions to move fatty acids across the outer membrane while FACS activates these compounds for further metabolism rendering this process unidirectional .
The technical and scientific significance of this work is several-fold .
First , it will define how the transport protein FadL is positioned within the membrane .
This research will involve modifying the protein for detection and the introduction of amino acid substitutions to assess function .
Second , this work will use fluorescent techniques to define the activity of FadL using artificial membranes .
More specifically , this will involve monitoring the movement of fatty acids across membranes containing FadL so that the fundamental properties guiding activity can be determined .
Third , this work will investigate how FACS moves into the membrane , where it activates fatty acids as they are transported .
And fourth , we expect to define the structure of FACS to further understand how this protein functions in fatty acid transport .
This work is designed to provide fundamental insights into the molecular mechanisms underpinning the movement of fatty acids across the membrane and how they subsequently function as effecter molecules regulating fatty acid responsive gene expression .
This experimental system serves as a paradigm for understanding this process in other systems , including mammals .
In addition , this research program will provide a training environment in molecular genetics , molecular biology and biochemistry for graduate , undergraduate and high school students .
Although a tremendous amount of information is available on physiological , biochemical , and molecular aspects of endocrinology , very little is known about the evolution of endocrine regulation .
Genetically-based variations in endocrine traits provide the raw material upon which natural selection acts during the initial stages of adaptive evolution .
Thus , a key step in understanding the evolution of hormonal control is the characterization of genetically-based variation in endocrine regulators within species .
The goal of the present multi-disciplinary study is to identify the variable molecular and physiological factors that cause genetically-based variation in the enzyme juvenile hormone esterase ( JHE ) in a cricket species .
JHE degrades and regulates the key insect hormone , juvenile hormone , and has been the subject of intensive study in the Principal Investigator 's laboratory during the past 15 years .
This proposal has three primary research objectives .
First , using both in vivo and in vitro approaches , the following hypothesis will be tested genetic variation in the concentration of or tissue sensitivity to neurohormones causes genetically based variation in JHE activity and tissue distribution .
Experiments will largely involve assessing the effect of extracts or implants of neural tissue derived from high- or low- JHE activity genetic stocks on JHE activity and related endocrine traits in the same vs alternate lines .
Second , the role of variation in JHE messenger RNA abundance as the cause of genetically-based variation in JHE activity will be tested .
JHE mRNA abundance will be compared between high and low activity lines using Northern blots employing a probe derived from a recently obtained , nearly full-length JHE cDNA .
Third , the high and low JHE activity lines will be crossed and backcrossed to determine the degree of co-segregation among ( 1 ) JHE activity and associated endocrine traits , ( 2 ) molecular correlates of these traits ( JHE mRNA level ) , and ( 3 ) potential regulators of these traits .
This research will simultaneously provide important new information for several different areas of biology .
This will be the first study to identify the molecular and physiological causes of genetically-based variation in an endocrine regulator in natural populations .
This project will result in the first detailed synthesis of endocrine physiology , molecular biology , and quantitative genetics .
Finally , these studies will constitute the first investigations of genetic variation in neuroendocrine regulation in natural populations and will set the stage for subsequent identification of these regulators and the genes that encode them .
Exposure to solar ultraviolet radiation ( UVR ) is a fact of life for organisms living inthe photic zone of aquatic environments .
It is increasingly evident that zooplankton , phytoplankton , protozoa , and bacterioplankton exhibit taxon-specific differences inphysiological and behavioral responses to UVR exposure .
Although competition fornutrients is recognized as a critical factor in structuring plankton communitycomposition , nothing is known of the significance of UVR under natural conditions for theintensity of competition among plankton for limiting mineral nutrients .
The proposedresearch will help to fill this gap in knowledge .
We will examine the main andinteraction effects of the nutrient and UVR regime on the growth rates and competition forphosphorus of naturally occurring phytoplankton and bacterioplankton .
A model ispresented and predictions made regarding the severity of nutrient competition under arange in conditions of nutrient ( organic carbon and phosphorus ) ratios and UVR exposure.We predict that , because of differential effects on bacterioplankton and phytoplanktongrowth rates , UVR will modify the severity of competition between phytoplankton andbacterioplankton for phosphorus .
Using samples collected from a low-altitude reservoir innorth Mississippi , experiments will be conducted to test the model predictions .
Thisstudy fulfills two needs .
It will be the first to evaluate by experimentation usingnatural sunlight the interaction effects of UVR and the nutrient regime on growth rates ofautotrophic and heterotrophic plankton under various degrees of nutrient limitation.Second , it will provide knowledge of the influence of the UVR regime on the relativeimportance of autotrophic and bacterial heterotrophic production in a southern U.S.aquatic ecosystem , where , compared to higher latitudes , there has been very littleresearch on the ecological significance of UVR .
Students will be involved in all aspectsof the project , from planning to sampling to data analysis to presentation .
Withanticipated continued increases of UVR in temperate regions due to ozone depletion , theeffect of UVR on plankton trophic-level relationships constitutes a timely and importantproblem .
This proposal focuses on the ecological and genetic impacts of the introduction of non-native rainbow trout ( Oncorhynchus mykiss ) on native gene pools of threatened Yellowstone cutthroat trout ( O. clarki bouvieri ) .
In addition to competition , predation and the introduction of disease organisms by introduced species , for some native fish species , a major threat is that of hybridization with the introduced species .
Hybrids , if fertile , can spread and cause the complete replacement of parental genes with those of the introduced species .
This study is designed to determine the extent of hybridization between Yellowstone cutthroat trout and rainbow trout as well as the degree of genetic dilution that has occurred in native gene pools .
In addition , the study will also test whether particular features of the environment ( temperature , elevation , stream flow , etc .
) are correlated with the presence or absence of pure species or hybrids .
In this manner , the study will determine if particular environments favor the spread of hybrid fishes , or provide an advantage to the remaining pure populations of Yellowstone cutthroat trout.This study will provide the first documentation of the pattern of genetic invasion of rainbow trout and begin to explore the ecological mechanisms that are responsible for this pattern .
If environmental correlates are found which predict the success of native Yellowstone cutthroat trout over hybrids , such habitats can be given top priority for conservation .
Only through a combined approach of understanding both the ecological and genetic factors that influence the success of invasive species , can we ever hope to deter their spread and save native gene pools The Nevada Desert FACE Facility ( NDFF ) is a long-term research project examining the responses of an intact Mojave Desert ecosystem to elevated CO2 .
In the first four years of NDFF operation , we found that primary production increased substantially at elevated CO2 , but only in wet years , and that an exotic annual grass responded more strongly than did native shrubs and annuals .
Therefore , our initial results suggest that an ecosystem type ( drylands ) that represents 30 % of the earth 's terrestrial surface area may not respond to elevated CO2 in a simple manner , as predicted by existing models of global change.In the context of these results and the long-term nature of our desert FACE experiment , we propose to address three overarching questions in this study1 .
Will elevated CO2 alter community composition and structure in the Mojave Desert by continuing to stimulate a disproportionate increase in an exotic annual species ? 2 .
Will the increases in production and changes in nutrient dynamics that we have observed in response to a step-change increase in CO2 be sustained over time ? 3 .
Can we adapt proven models of desert ecosystem function to predict how this Mojave Desert ecosystem will respond to elevated CO2 in the future ? The intellectual merit of this proposal lies in our conceptual approach in which we are focusing on the functional interactions between species composition and ecosystem function , tied together by an explicit modeling component .
The model will be an adaptation of an established , validated desert model ( PALS , the Patch Arid Lands Simulator ) that will be used to develop a synthetic understanding of biotic and abiotic controls on carbon , nitrogen , and water fluxes to elevated CO2 in this arid ecosystem .
The broader impact of this proposed study will be an examination of the potential invasion of an exotic species in response to elevated CO2 , and how this process may impact ecosystem function , and therefore ecosystem services , in a desert environment .
Through this research program , we are also forging a cohesive network between five research campuses .
To date , our research group has an excellent record of training undergraduate , graduate , and postdoctoral scholars at the NDFF , including members of underrepresented groups .
This study will similarly train a wide spectrum of students and postdocs , both at the NDFF and in our support laboratories .
In this project supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program , Professor Robert Kennedy and co-workers at the University of Florida will develop novel analytical methods that allow proteins to be detected and quantified based on their affinity for natural binding partners .
In the methods , fluorescently-labeled ligands for classes of proteins will be added to samples and the resulting complexes will be separated by capillary electrophoresis and detected with laser-induced fluorescence .
Binding systems that will be investigated include labeled GTP to detect G-proteins , NADH to detect dehydrogenases , labeled phosphopeptides to detect proteins containing src homology 2 domains , and src homology 2 domains to detect phosphorylated proteins .
The method is expected to provide high sensitivity ( attomole detection limits are expected ) , high speed ( analysis on the second to minute time scale are possible ) and facile automation .
The methods are expected to be useful for tracking the expression level of proteins or for discovery of novel proteins and binding partners of proteins .
As signal transduction in biological systems relies extensively on molecular recognition , these affinity methods are expected to be especially useful in experiments aimed at uncovering the regulation of receptor-mediated changes in cells .
The methods will be tested on pancreatic beta-cells where they may ultimately be useful in developing a better understanding of insulin secretion The sequencing of the genome has provided a blueprint for life .
The blueprint is actually the code for all of the proteins that are made in a cell .
Cells are not readily defined however even by all of the proteins that they make .
What are the functions of the proteins ?
How do they interact with each other ?
How are the interactions and functions controlled ?
A short answer to these questions is that proteins are controlled by their affinity i.e. , ability to bind selected targets or partners within the cell .
In this project , a method is sought that allows proteins to be rapidly and sensitively detected based on their affinity for a particular molecule .
Importantly , the method will allow all the proteins with a given affinity to be separated and detected .
The new method will be at least 1000 times as sensitive as existing methods and can be performed in seconds or minutes rather than hours .
This new method will allow new proteins or protein mixtures to be rapidly screened for certain binding properties or functions .
It will also allow classes of known proteins to be rapidly assayed .
The speed and sensitivity of the assays will enable applications in diverse fields such as drug discovery , signal transduction ( i.e. , understanding intracellular chemical communication ) , and biotechnology .
Ticks are vectors of a number of important diseases , and with mechanisms for controlling ticks often less effective than those for controlling insects , these arachnids may be more of a health problem for humans and wildlife than insects .
The long term goals of the these studies are to aid in the development of mechanisms for preventing transmission of disease-causing microbes from the tick to its next host , and to exploit differences between tick genera to develop control measures for the spread of infectious diseases or to control the microorganisms themselves.This study addresses the fundamental issue of the tick response to bacterial infection and also addresses the question of why some microbes have been able to successfully colonize blood-feeding arthropods and become the agents of vector-borne diseases .
Specifically the proposal examines the hypothesis that Dermacentor variabilis ( American dog tick ) expresses a robust antimicrobial response following bacterial challenge .
In contrast Ixodes scapularis ( deer tick ) and Amblyomma americanum ( Lone Star tick ) do not appear to express this response , at least to the same microbes .
The proposed studies will provide information on how and why these ticks respond differently to assorted microbes .
This project will concentrate on one fundamental mechanism by which blood-feeding arthropods resist infection by invading microbes .
This is the use of antimicrobial peptides , in particular the defensins , a key component of an organism 's innate immune response .
The project will use ticks because they harbor and transmit a greater variety of microbes than any other arthropod group .
Many arthropods possess a well-developed immune system that rejects most invading microbes , however , little is known about the immune system in ticks .
More precise knowledge is needed to understand the limitations in the tick 's immune system that have encouraged the ability to harbor such a variety of microorganisms .
Ticks of the genus Ixodes tolerate a greater diversity of microbial species than other tick genera .
Other genera , including Dermacentor and Amblyomma are noted for their association with one , or at most two specific types of microbe .
Most Ixodes spp .
that are microbe-tolerant are generalists , feeding on a diverse array of hosts ranging from cold-blooded vertebrates to almost any type of bird or mammal .
It is proposed that these tick generalists have a less efficient immune system that facilitates colonization by a diverse array of invading microbes .
It is hypothesized that differences in the tick innate immune mechanisms are important determinants of their ability to function as vectors of pathogenic agents .
By using the Lyme disease-causing spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi , and a non-pathogenic bacterium , Rickettsia montana , and comparing the response to these microbes in Ixodes scapularis ( the vector for B. burgdorferi ) , Dermacentor variabilis ( host for R. montana ) and Amblyomma americanum ( vector for Ehrlichia ) , the role of defensin will be examined .
The hypothesis will be explored within four aims , concentrating on the tick defensin , varisin .
The aims are ( 1 ) Characterize the tick defensin gene ( vsnD ) from D. variabilis .
( 2 ) Determine in which tissues of the adult tick the varisin gene is expressed , and whether the defensin is expressed by nymphs , perhaps giving an indication that defensin is important throughout the various life stages of the tick .
( 3 ) Determine whether other tick genera ( Ixodes and Amblyomma ) have and selectively express a defensin gene in response to different bacteria .
( 4 ) Compare the response of the different ticks to Rickettsia montana , an intracellular organism normally found in D. variabilis .
Results of these studies will improve our understanding of the role of defensin in the innate immune response of ticks following challenge with various microbes .
Elucidation of this critically important defensive system will provide information regarding the reason some of these ticks transmit disease-causing microorganisms .
CTS-0212339Prieve , Dennis C.Gordon Research ConferenceThe purpose of this grant is for partial support of the Gordon Research Conference onChemistry at Interfaces to be held 7-12 July 2002 at Connecticut College in New London , Connecticut .
The funds requested will be used to encourage wider participation in theconference by young chemical engineering faculty and promising graduate students byproviding partial support for travel expenses and conference fees.The program for the conference has four sub-themes 1 ) Biomolecules at Interfaces , 2 ) Self-Assembly at Interfaces , 3 ) Consequences of Colloid Forces and 4 ) Charge Effects inNonaqueous Media .
22 speakers and 20 discussion leaders have been invited and agreed to participate in the oral program .
In addition to the invited talks , posters are encouragedto be submitted from all conference participants , especially from those not invited tospeak .
A 30-minute time slot is included in the morning program each day for oraloverviews .
The Vice-Chair will select between 3 and 6 posters to be summarized orallyeach day in this time slot .
Full examination of all posters will be conducted in eachafternoon 's poster session .
A final report will be prepared and submitted to the National Science Foundation .
In several major groups of vertebrate animals , offspring sex is determined permanently by environmental temperatures experienced during embryonic development .
Little is understood about the importance of many aspects of this phenomenon ( known as TSD ) .
The roles of genetic and nongenetic maternal effects , like reproductive physiology and behavior under natural conditions , are particularly in need of critical evaluation .
The proposed research will investigate several significant maternal aspects of the biology of TSD in a natural population of long-lived vertebrates that has been studied in detail since 1988 ( 1 ) the impact of maternally-derived yolk hormones and how such hormones might vary with maternal age , ( 2 ) the genetically inherited component of nesting behavior of females with TSD , and ( 3 ) the genetically inherited component of offspring sex determination under TSD.These questions will be addressed with a series of multi-year field and laboratory projects .
A team of postdoctoral and student researchers will gather crucial new physiological , behavioral , and genetic data .
The research team will study animals from a natural population during nesting events .
Vegetation cover over nests , which accurately predicts offspring sex ratio , and nesting date will be recorded .
Data will then be obtained for offspring sex ratio for each nest , and incubation temperature , yolk hormone levels in eggs , and offspring paternity for a focal subset of nests .
The findings of this research will have important implications for the impacts of climate change and human habitat use on the biology and conservation of species with TSD .
This research program will also provide extensive educational opportunities for numerous students ( including underrepresented minorities , persons with disabilities , and women ) and the public .
0212110JefferyLittle is known about the origins of vertebrate features in the Phylum Chordata .
Here , the focus is on aspects of urochordate development that are expected to shed new light on this important problem in evolution and development .
The overall goal is to assess the origins of two key vertebrate features in the ascidian urochordates ( 1 ) migratory neural crest cells and ( 2 ) larval musculature specified by inductive processes .
The ascidian species used in contemporary developmental biology ( e. g. , Ciona , Molgula , Styela , and Halocynthia ) exhibit rapidly developing , highly streamlined tadpole larvae .
These derived larva appear to lack migratory neural crest cells and contain only about 40 tail muscle cells , which are primarily specified by localized cytoplasmic determinants .
The streamlined tadpoles , which have evolved for rapid dispersal , are not representative of most ascidian larvae .
Most ascidian species have larger , slowly developing tadpoles with more complex heads and robust tails , which are likely to represent the true ancestral state .
Accordingly , Dr. Jeffery will introduce here the ascidian Ecteinascidia turbinata as an experimental system to study the origin of key vertebrate features in the urochordates .
Ecteinascidia , a close relative of Ciona , has a giant tadpole larva exhibiting a head with preformed siphon rudiments , enlarged sensory organs , and pharyngeal gill slits , and a robust tail with 1134 muscle cells .
The development of ascidians with highly differentiated tadpoles has been virtually ignored and is ripe for analysis using modern technologies .
The Ecteinascidia system will permit him to combine a variety of experimental embryological and molecular approaches , including use of ongoing Ciona genomic and EST databases , to study the evolution of development .
This proposal specifically addresses neural crest and muscle development in Ecteinascidia embryos .
First , he will determine whether Ecteinascidia embryos have migratory cells homologous to vertebrate neural crest cells using a combination of vital dye and gene marking studies .
He already has strong evidence from DiI marking experiments that migratory neural crest-like cells are present .
He will determine the embryonic sources , regional migration patterns , and developmental fates of the neural crest-like cells , and compare their properties to vertebrate neural crest cells .
Second , he will determine whether the development of tail muscle cells in Ecteinascidia is controlled by cytoplasmic determinants , the predominant means of tail muscle specification in ascidians with streamlined larvae , or by inductive processes , the method of muscle specification characteristic of vertebrates .
These studies will be carried out by a combination of cell lineage tracing , in situ mRNA and protein localization , and blastomere isolation and recombination .
The intellectual merit of these studies is that they will provide new information on the evolutionary history of neural crest cells and the mechanisms of tail muscle development in the urochordates .
The broader impacts of the proposed activity is that it will address the origin of key vertebrate features in the Phylum Chordata and focus our future attention on particular chordate or non-chordate groups in order to chart the evolutionary beginnings of the complex vertebrate body plan .
Finally , the research is planned to foster general education in research by incorporating undergraduate students into the investigative process .
A grant has been awarded to Dr. Annalisa Berta at San Diego State University tosupport a collaborative project involving museum and university scientists in the reconstruction of evolutionary relationships among fossil and living species of baleen whales .
Both anatomical and molecular data sets will be employed and the results of separate and combined analyses of these data sets explored .
This study will add considerable new anatomical information from fossil baleen whales ( especially characters from the skull and jaws ) examined in various museum collections in the US , Europe , Australasia , and Japan .
This framework will then be used to interpret the development of the unique filter feeding specializations of baleen whales , especially the evolutionary transition in feeding from tooth-bearing fossil species to baleen-bearing modern species .
Few studies have investigated the interrelationships of baleen whales and the results are conflicting .
This study will place modern baleen whale diversity in a historical context .
Study of the past diversity of baleen whales in relation to times of global climate change may suggest conservation strategies for endangered modern species that may not have otherwise been considered .
This project will provide training for both undergraduate and graduate students .
Results of the study will be incorporated into exhibits about whale evolution planned at the San Diego Museum of Natural History .
Fire ant colony fitness and worker polymorphismWalter R. TschinkelProject Summary Darwin considered the existence of a sterile worker caste in social insects to be a challenge to his theory of evolution by natural selection .
After all , how could the traits of an individual that did not reproduce be passed on to the next generation ?
The answer that Darwin and his followers have generally accepted is that the colony is the reproductive unit on which natural selection acts .
Thus , whatever worker traits allowed the colony to place more new colonies in the next generation would be favored by natural selection .
The great majority of ant species have only two physical castes reproductive individuals ( queens ) , and more-or-less sterile workers of a single size and shape .
In about 15 % of ant species , the workers are present in a great range of sizes ( up to 1000-fold difference in weight ) and shapes .
Such worker polymorphism , as it is called , is always associated with further division of labor within the worker caste .
It has long been assumed that worker polymorphism benefits the colony by increasing colony efficiency , so that the savings can be invested in additional reproductives , enhancing colony fitness ( sexual production ) .
Several tests of surrogates for fitness ( foraging , brood-rearing , etc .
) have yielded equivocal results , but none of these surrogates are tightly linked to sexual production .
There has never been a direct test of the effects of worker polymorphism on colony fitness , that is , on the production of sexuals .
The proposed experiments will be the first direct test of the value of worker polymorphism to colony fitness .
In a large , 2-yr field experiment on the fire ant , Solenopsis invicta , worker pupae of selected sizes will be transferred among colonies such that one set of colonies will be enhanced in large workers , another in small workers , a third will serve as unaltered control , and a fourth as undisturbed control .
The colony fitness of these experimental colonies will be measured by collecting the total annual sexual production using tent-traps .
Effects ( if any ) of altering the worker polymorphism might be either direct through involvement of large workers in sexual production , or indirect through altered territorial defense or foraging .
Therefore , the food quantity and quality , as well as territory size will also be monitored and compared to controls .
The results of these field experiments will be supplemented with a series of laboratory experiments that will test each possible link ( direct , food , territory ) between worker polymorphism and colony sexual production .
The results will address a fundamental issue of great interest to evolutionary biology and social insect biology .
RUI Developmental and Cognitive Constraints on Birdsong LearningRichard F. Braaten , Colgate University , PIAnimals are constrained in the kinds of things that they are most likely to learn .
For example , humans and other primates easily learn to fear snakes and other predators of their evolutionary ancestors , but do not so easily learn to fear some other objects , even when they are clearly associated with danger .
As another example , rodents and other mammals are more likely to learn about the association between the taste of food and subsequent illness than about other characteristics of the feeding experience .
Birdsong learning is a particularly interesting example of constrained learning because it is constrained in two ways .
First , songbirds are more likely to learn the song of their species than the songs of other species , even under experimental conditions in which the amount of song exposure is equated .
Second , like human language learning , in which languages are learned more effectively early in life , birdsong learning is also temporally constrained .
Songbirds are much more likely to learn songs presented during a specialized early period of development , the sensitive period .
This project attempts to better understand the role that cognitive processes such as attention , perception , and memory may play in constraints on song learning in birds , and also how the role of these cognitive processes may change with development .
For example , do birds learn the songs of their own species because those songs are particularly memorable ?
Are they especially memorable during the sensitive period of song learning ?
To answer these questions , zebra finches will learn to make responses to particular songs to receive food reward .
Birds will later be tested for their memory of both their own and other species ' songs .
In order to study possible developmental changes in memory , zebra finches will be tested during and after the sensitive period for song learning , at 30 and 90 days .
Effects of early experience will also be evaluated by testing 30-day-old birds raised in acoustic isolation from zebra finch song .
Similar experiments will be done that will assess developmental changes in attention , perception , and categorization of the songs of zebra finches and other species.The broader impacts of this research are two-fold .
An understanding of the cognitive processes involved in constraints on song learning may help to better understand constraints on learning in general .
Song learning in birds has many parallels with human speech development , including the existence of sensitive periods , and the presumed involvement of attentional , perceptual , and memory processes in human speech learning .
The second broader impact of this work derives from it being carried out in an undergraduate institution .
Concepts and experiments from this proposal will be integrated into all levels of the undergraduate curriculum .
Undergraduates will be involved in the research both during the academic year , and as part of a special summer research program at Colgate University .
0212054CarsonLTREBWe have underway a long-term , large-scale experiment that is addressing one of the primaryhypotheses proposed to explain the maintenance of tree species diversity in tropical forests , namely , that mammals acting as herbivores , seed predators , and dispersers , are critical determinants of tropicaltree diversity and abundance .
This experiment is essentially a community-level test of the Janzen-ConnellHypothesis that predicts that the removal of ground-dwelling mammals will ultimately cause adecline in tropical tree diversity .
Under this scenario , mammals preferentially prey on the juveniles oftree species that are abundant and ultimately keep these tree species in check.The study system is mature-phase tropical moist forest in central Panama on Barro ColoradoIsland ( BCI ) and the adjacent mainland ( Gigante Peninsula ) .
Since1994 , we have monitored theconsequences of excluding ground-dwelling mammals in 8 large ( 1355m2 ) fenced exclosures andadjacent unfenced control plots .
Four pairs of treatment and control plots were established on BCI and4 pairs were located on Gigante in similar mature forest .
Prior to initiating any treatments , wecensused , measured , identified , and tagged all woody plants > 50 cm in height in all plots .
Inaddition , we quantified newly recruited seedlings in 28 smaller subplots in each large plot .
In total , we have now followed the fate of more than 60,000 individual seedlings and saplings .
Overall , theexclusion of mammals led to a substantial and sustained increase in seedling density.The results of this experiment to date suggest that excluding mammals may significantlyincrease woody species diversity of the seedling layer at least in the short-term ( ~10 yrs ) .
Thus , ourresults contrast sharply with the community-level predictions of the Janzen-Connell hypothesis .
Wepropose a new conceptual model that suggests that the consequences of the short term removal ofmammals ( 2-25 yrs ) from tropical forests , whether by experimental exclusion or more broadly viaover hunting , will cause first an increase in woody species diversity and thereafter potentially adecrease ( see Fig .
1 ) .
This result will first appear in the seedling layer ( 1-50 cm in height ) and thenmove as a wave through larger size classes .
The data to date , however , even after 7-years , remainequivocal .
The short term increase in diversity clearly documented inside exclosure plots may be atransient effect of the 1998 El Nino Southern Oscillation ( ENSO ) event .
Specifically , the ENSO eventcaused a severe and extended dry season that increased seedling mortality .
Because there was a higherseedling density inside the exclosures , these sites may have been buffered from the drought .
Webelieve that it is imperative that we continue this experiment and monitor the next phase as the seedlinglayer moves into the small sapling size class .
The conservation implications of this work are clear ; theoverexploitation of the mammalian fauna in many tropical forest reserves , parks , and fragments mayhave long-term negative consequences for forest diversity that may not become apparent for decades.It is only through long-term experiments that we can unequivocally separate out short-term dynamicsfrom long-term forest trajectories .
This award is to support research that will develop a continuous record of glaciation over the last two to three glacial cycles in mid latitude South America that can be compared to nearby ice core records and glaciomarine sequences.Field work will be undertaken to map moraines and outwash terraces in detail .
Surface exposure dating will be carried out to provide a high-resolution chronostratigraphic framework within which paleoclimate data can be placed .
Soil analyses will be performed to provide soil-moisture history for the region .
Other analyses that will be performed to fine-tune exposure surface dating include better estimates of boulder erosion rates , and refinement of local production rates for cosmogenic nuclides .
The broader impacts of this proposed research center on the development of a continuous high resolution record of southern hemisphere glaciation .
Successful development of this record holds the potential for answering fundamental questions regarding synchrony of climate change in the northern and southern hemispheres .
Triclosan is a broad spectrum antimicrobial agent that is currently found in many consumer goods .
Triclosan inhibits the bacterial enzyme enoyl acyl carrier protein ( ACP ) reductase .
This enzyme catalyzes the last step in fatty acid biosynthesis in microorganisms .
Several studies have indicated that decreased susceptibility to triclosan correlates with quinolone antibiotic resistance .
The quinolones inhibit the bacterial DNA metabolic enzymes , DNA gyrase and topoisomerase IV .
Resistance to the quinolone antibiotics maps to the genes encoding DNA gyrase , topoisomerase IV , or to genes encoding multi-drug efflux pumps .
Triclosan resistance also maps to genes encoding multi-drug efflux pumps or to genes encoding regulatory proteins that control the expression of these pumps .
The primary focus of this project is to determine whether triclosan resistance contributes to antibiotic resistance in Staphylococcus aureus .
S. aureus is a human pathogen for which therapeutic options for the treatment of infections caused by this organism have become limited .
Preliminary studies by this laboratory have demonstrated the triclosan susceptibility profiles of 12 S. aureus clinical and laboratory strains .
Triclosan resistance was detected in 10 of these strains .
Among the 10 triclosan resistant strains , 4 are also resistant to the quinolone antibiotics .
This project will use molecular biological and biochemical experiments to further characterize the nature of these triclosan resistant strains .
The emergence of antibiotic resistance is a growing problem among pathogenic bacteria .
The results of this project will lead to a deeper understanding of the impact of antimicrobial product usage by consumers on the emergence of antibiotic resistant bacteria .
Undisturbed peatland ecosystems are believed to represent a net sink for atmospheric carbon ( C ) .
This research focuses on C balance in western Canadian peatlands of Alberta , Saskatchewan and Manitoba , a region where disturbances , especially fire , diminish the regional C sink strength .
In addition to direct C losses via combustion , peatlands continue to release C after fire , as peat decomposition continues with greatly diminished post-fire net primary production of vegetation .
The investigators will examine the effects of wildfire on the C balance of peatlands across western Canada .
The research is structured around three questions how do post-fire C fluxes vary spatially and temporally across western Canadian peatlands ; to what extent is regional variation in post-fire C-balance recovery attributable to variation in post-fire plant successional pathways ; and to what extent is regional variation in post-fire C-balance recovery attributable to variation in post-fire plant nutrient and moisture conditions in the burned peat substrate ?
The Convolvulaceae ( morning glory family ) is a moderate-size family ( 50-60 genera , 2000 species worldwide ) of mostly tropical plants , which has received only sporadic attention from taxonomists .
Consequently , the identity of species and the classification of these into reliably identifiable genera are problematic .
A specialist on the group , Dr. George Staples of the Bishop Museum in Hawaii , is studying the mostly Asian members of the family , focusing especially on the genera Operculina , Rivea , and Blinkworthia .
If this process of verifying purportedly new taxa could be streamlined then the completion of a global biodiversity inventory could be expedited through greater efficiency of research effort .
The activities include the compilation of an Internet-accessible and authenticated nomenclator for all described taxa of Convolvulaceae in tropical and subtropical Asia ( Pakistan east to the Philippines and China south to Queensland , Australia ) .
Where a genus has an accepted classification and the taxonomy has been reconciled with recently collected specimens housed in the major museum collections , those species and infraspecific taxon names will be incorporated into the nomenclator .
Where no accepted classification exists ( the genera Argyreia , Merremia , and Jacquemontia ) , revisionary work will commence on the Asian taxa , as a basis for worldwide treatments later .
Special research attention will be paid to early scientific names ( usually by European taxonomists ) that have not been taken into account in contemporary classifications .
The nomenclator will endeavor to trace all scientific names and provide their current disposition , with documentation via literature and selected specimen citations.This research will be carried out primarily in European and British herbaria and libraries , with recourse to specimen loans for more detailed study at the PI 's home institution .
The products will be a series of taxonomic revisions that provide better methods of taxonomic identification , improve classification at the specific , generic , and tribal levels , and contribute to nomenclatural reform .
The nomenclator itself will provide the first inventory of Asian taxa of Convolvulaceae .
And the process for creating the nomenclator will shed light onto how the process for taxonomic verification of new , undescribed species can be made more efficient and thereby enhance the taxonomic enterprise .
A grant has been awarded to Dr. Philip Silverman of the Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation to elucidate the structural biology of conjugal ( lateral ) DNA transfer between F+ and F- strains of Escherichia coli .
This research seeks to define how the 30 or so DNA transfer ( Tra ) proteins encoded by the F plasmid are organized at the bacterial cell surface and tests the hypothesis that these proteins constitute a molecular machine that mediates conjugal DNA transfer .
The first specific aim is to characterize the interactions among the Tra proteins with the goal of understanding what the Tra protein machine looks like from a biochemical perspective .
The second specific aim of the research is to apply indirect immunofluorescence microscopy to determine how many Tra machines there are on each bacterial cell and how they are related spatially to each other , to F DNA , and to the bacterial cell surface as a whole .
This research is the first step towards a detailed structure/function analysis of conjugal DNA transfer mediated by the F plasmid.To broaden the impact of our research to science education in Oklahoma 's underserved rural schools , a third specific aim of the project is to survey antibiotic resistance plasmids in bacteria from the intestinal flora of livestock throughout Oklahoma .
These R plasmids will be isolated and partially characterized by rural high school science students in conjunction with The Oklahoma Science Project , which Dr. Silverman founded and directs .
Several considerations make this project both timely and important .
First , conjugal DNA transfer is connected to the dissemination of antibiotic resistance , an increasingly alarming public health problem .
Second , it is one of several mechanisms by which bacterial cells secrete macromolecules across their surface barriers ; these mechanisms are responsible for the pathogenicity of many bacteria .
Third , conjugal DNA transfer has applications in biotechnology ; a better understanding of the process will increase the number and scope of such applications .
Finally , the project will create more opportunities for Oklahoma 's rural students , including its sizable Native American cohort , to enter technology career paths .
Aquatic ecosystems are threatened by over enrichment with nitrogen ( N ) and phosphorus ( P ) .
For unclear reasons , P enrichment generally has the greatest impact in freshwater while N enrichment has the greatest impact in saltwater .
The goal of this study is to understand how the biogeochemistry of N and P change along the transition from freshwater to saltwater in an estuary .
The project will measure inputs and removals of N and P along the salinity transition of the Patuxent River estuary , investigate the importance of watershed-derived particulate P , and test hypotheses about interactions of N , P , iron and sulfur cycles .
Transformations and releases of N and P will be measured by incubating sediment cores from along the salinity gradient .
The mechanisms of salinity effects will be investigated by experimentally altering concentrations of seawater , sea salts , sulfate , and nitrate over incubated cores .
The results will help guide nutrient management in coastal ecosystems .
This is a collaborative project with Thomas Jordan ( DEB-0212543 ) Abstract0201574 , Adrian Rodriguez-Marek , Washington State UniversityCollaborative Research Investigation of Site Effects , Seismic Compression , and Liquefaction in the June 23 , 2001 Southern Peru EarthquakeDuring the past 25 years , the largest seismic event worldwide was the Southern Peru Earthquake of June 23 , 2001 ( Mw = 8.4 ) .
It damaged regions in and around the cities of Moquegua , Tacna , Arequipa , Camana , and Ilo .
A collaborative team of United States and Peruvian researchers conducted a geotechnical reconnaissance of the region shortly after the event .
Among the key finding were ( i ) the concentration of structural damage in some areas suggested the influence of site and possibly topographic amplification in the resulting damage levels ; ( ii ) considerable damage occurred to roadways and bridges in the affected regions as a result of seismic compression , liquefaction , landslides , and rockfalls.Large magnitude seismic events such as the Southern Peru Earthquake provide an opportunity to advance the state of geotechnical earthquake engineering practice through the development and study of detailed case histories .
These case studies are invaluable for calibration of existing design procedures and seismic codes , and they often serve as a springboard for developing new , more reliable analysis procedures .
The objective of this collaborative research between Washington State University and Drexel University is to ( 1 ) document and study site amplification and topographic effects in the cities of Tacna and Moquegua ; ( 2 ) develop and analyze case histories of seismic compression of compacted fills ; and ( 3 ) assemble and evaluate case histories of liquefaction and associated lateral spreading .
The research plan takes advantage of the investigators ' current working relationship with the Catholic University of Peru , and from their contacts with local officials from government , engineering societies , and industry .
The research involves several tasks ( a ) development of representative ground motions , ( b ) characterization of subsurface conditions by test borings , shear wave velocity measurements , and laboratory experiments , ( c ) compilation and development of detailed case histories , ( d ) analysis of the case histories , and ( e ) timely dissemination of the data and findings .
The case histories and associated data will be freely available on a dedicated Internet site , which will be developed in both English and Spanish to make it accessible to individuals in both the Unites States and abroad.This research will provide the profession with a series of case studies that may be used for calibration or validation of existing design and analysis procedures .
It will also aid the development of new or updated analysis procedures and building design codes and seismic guidelines .
The findings will have implications for the seismic safety community worldwide , and will be particularly relevant to regions such as the Pacific Northwest and Alaska , where the seismic hazard is controlled by subduction events .
Abstract0201317 , Ronaldo Borja , Stanford UniversityStatic and Dynamic Instability of Liquefiable SoilsThe objective of this project is to develop a finite element model for analyzing the dynamic instability and flow liquefaction of soils , including the accompanying lateral flow and large ground movement during and following an earthquake .
The model is based on a two-phase mixture theory with the following essential components ( a ) a constitutive model that replicates the buildup of excess pore pressure prior to liquefaction ; ( b ) a criterion for the onset of flow liquefaction instability ; and ( c ) a constitutive response at residual state following flow liquefaction .
A bounding surface plasticity model is used to model the anisotropic cyclic stress-strain behavior of soils before the onset of flow liquefaction , as well as to predict the accompanying pore pressure buildup .
Large deformations are employed through the use of a finite deformation theory based on a multiplicative decomposition of the deformation gradient.A major component of the project is devoted to analyzing the results of monotonic undrained triaxial tests and cyclic undrained simple shear tests as a boundary-value problem .
A universal assumption employed in interpreting the results of these tests is that the specimen is deforming homogeneously , suggesting that any measured specimen response may be interpreted as a material response .
However , there are strong indications that this is far from being correct .
Among the issues addressed by performing boundary-value problem simulations is whether or not the quasi-steady state condition commonly observed in saturated sand specimens of intermediate density is non-local .
Also being investigated are the effects of imperfections and other perturbations on the response of soil specimens taken as a structural system .
Finally , a systematic methodology is being devised for re-calibrating the constitutive model parameters in the finite deformation regime , and the finite element model is used to reanalyze the collapse of the Lower San Fernando Dam following the San Fernando earthquake of 1971 .
The project will investigate the role of ULF waves in the energization and diffusion of highly energetic radiation belt particles .
It will extend a previously existing two-dimensional model of energetic particles in the Earth 's radiation belts to three dimensions , which will allow the model to include effects such as losses of energetic particles to the upper atmosphere .
It will couple the model to a more realistic model of the magnetic field and electric field produced by Magnetohydrodynamic modeling of the global magnetosphere .
This individual investigator award supports a project that will investigate the electrical and magnetic properties of metallic heterostructures fabricated from superconducting ( S ) , normal metal ( N ) , and ferromagnetic ( F ) elements .
The goal is to explore the nature of the interaction between ferromagnetism and superconductivity in FS structures , and to investigate the influence of long-range phase coherence on the thermal transport in NS heterostructures .
Electrical transport properties of FS heterostructures , will be used to attempt to verify the existence of long-range superconducting correlations in a diffusive ferromagnet placed in contact with a superconductor .
In addition , effects of finite spin polarization in the ferromagnet on the transport properties of FS structures will be studied .
Using a novel local thermometry technique , effects in the thermopower of NS devices , as well the thermal conductance of NS structures , will be explored .
Samples will be fabricated by electron-beam lithography and measured at millikelvin temperatures using various low temperature cryostats , including a dilution refrigerator and a 3He refrigerator .
The students and post-docs trained on this project will gain experience with both microfabrication and low temperature techniques .
Thus becoming well-prepared for careers in industry , academia or government laboratories .
Superconductors are materials that show a number of unusual electrical and magnetic properties at low temperatures , the best known property being their ability to carry an electrical current without resistance .
These properties form the basis for a number of useful applications , such as very high field magnets .
When a superconductor is placed in good contact with a conventional normal metal such as copper or gold , or a ferromagnet like iron or nickel , the interaction between the two different elements results in new effects with potential device applications .
The goal of this project is to investigate the electrical and thermal transport properties of normal metals and ferromagnets placed in close proximity to a superconductor .
Electrical properties of structures incorporating ferromagnets and superconductors will be studied to investigate the interplay between magnetism and superconductivity in very small devices .
In addition , heat transport in a normal metal placed in contact with a superconductor will be explored .
These measurements will help us gain further insight into the interaction between superconductors , ferromagnets and normal metals on very small size scales .
The samples for these experiments will be fabricated using advanced electron-beam lithography techniques , and measured using sophisticated techniques at temperatures near absolute zero .
Post-doctoral associates and graduate students trained on this project will be exposed to a number of experimental techniques which will be useful in future careers in either industry or academia .
This U.S.-Czech materials research project involving Ctirad Uher of the University of Michigan and his Czech partner , Petr Lostak at the University of Pardubice , will build upon their recently reported observation of long-range ferromagnetism in a class of ansiotropic semiconductors based on antimony telluride [ Sb2Te3 ] , doped with a minute amount of vanadium .
They now plan to study the effect of transition metal ions incorporated in the crystal lattice of Sb2Te3 single crystals with the goal of identifying dopants that enhance the Curie temperature beyond the vanadium-doped value ( ~25K ) .
Specifically , the researchers will examine the role of chromium , manganese , iron , nickel and cobalt .
The collaborative effort benefits from the Michigan group 's expertise in transport and magnetic properties of tetradymite-type structure semiconductors and the Czech partners ' strengths in growth of single crystals and characterization of these materials .
Results in this area of diluted magnetic semiconductors may lead to applications in information technology given the promising dual features of charge carrier transport and spin manipulation in thin films .
This collaborative project in condensed matter physics fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling experts in the United States and Central Europe to combine complementary talents and share research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence .
This project , submitted under the Small Grant for Exploratory Research ( SGER ) program , will study the effect of the recent terrorist events and subsequent American actions on the nature and structure of trust in political and social institutions in the United States .
The researchers are undertaking a two-wave national panel survey designed to capture the effects of information on the levels of various forms of trust and the relationships among these forms of trust .
The research offers the unique opportunity to study public trust in the aftermath of the terrorist attacks and assess the effect of a national crisis on the dynamics of trust .
These data will be of value to scholars interested in the topic and also to decision-makers trying to differentiate between various forms of trust and how it rises or falls as new information becomes available to the public .
The researchers will be able to gauge how public trust changes over time based on the actions taken by the U.S. government in tandem with changes in the perceived threat .
Regionally , anthropogenic aerosols can lead to large reductions in the surface solar irradiance , a corresponding increase in atmospheric solar heating , stronger low-level inversions , suppression of rainfall due to the direct microphysical effect , and less efficient removal of pollutants .
These aerosol effects , in addition to altering the temperature distribution , can also lead to a weaker hydrological cycle , a major environmental issue for the 21st century .
The overall goal of this project is to understand the above-mentioned aerosol effects .
The specific objectives are twofold1 ) To quantify the direct and the indirect aerosol radiative forcings on regional scales by integrating in-situ , surface and satellite observations with a comprehensive Monte-Carlo Aerosol-Cloud Radiation ( MACR ) model that accounts for hybrid mixing of inorganic , organic and black carbon species .
MACR will also account accurately for aerosol forcing ( direct and first indirect ) in cloudy skies .
These estimates will also be used to improve the treatment of aerosol radiative effects and aerosol-cloud interactions in the NCAR Community Climate Model ( CCM ) .
The focus will be on regional Aerosol Hot Spots , which contribute the most to the global mean anthropogenic aerosol loading including the Asian , African and N. American regions .
The selected regions coincide with regions where field observations are available.2 ) To use the regional aerosol forcing as input to the NCAR CCM/Climate System Model ( CSM ) and estimate impacts of the forcing on climate and the hydrological cycle .
Our focus will be primarily on the Asian aerosols which contribute as much as 3O~5O % of the global anthropogenic aerosol optical depth .
The climate model will be run both in prescribed-surface sea temperature mode ( CCM ) as well as in fully coupled mode ( CSM ) .
So far , aerosol has been portrayed simply as counteracting greenhouse gas induced arming , and its counteracting extent has been the primary concern .
The inclusion of absorbing carbonaceous aerosols is likely to challenge this traditional view substantially .
Preliminary CCM experiments with the Indian Ocean Experiment ( INDOEX ) absorbing aerosols reveal that the South Asian haze regionally cools the surface , shifts the inter-tropical convergence zone northwards and remotely suppresses the convection in the equatorial western Pacific with implications to El Nino-Southern Oscillation cycles.The proposed research builds on the infrastructure developed under NSF Center for Clouds Chemistry and Climate ( C4 ) and INDOEX , including C4 Data Integration system ( CIDS ) ; MACR ; Satellite aerosol retrieval based on chemical data ; three dimensional aerosol assimilation model ; Beowulf cluster computers ; and the network of collaborators developed through INDOEX .
An array of ground based , airborne and satellite observations will be used.The aerosol forcing and climate response results generated by this work should contribute directly to future national and international climate impact assessments .
The aerosol forcing from this work will serve as an independent estimate from that provided by global models .
It also should lead to significant improvements in GCM treatment of aerosol forcing .
Co-infection of a single host by multiple viruses is very common in nature .
Within-host interactions can profoundly affect the severity of disease and efficiency of virus transmission , depending on the exact number of viruses that enter the host .
This co-infection number can be impacted by ( 1 ) the host species experiencing the infection , and/or ( 2 ) the relatedness of viruses causing the infection .
However , the relative importance of these two factors is not well-understood , and the current project seeks to fill this intellectual gap .
In particular , the project addresses the question using a family of viruses that infect bacteria .
Laboratory experiments will study the evolution of virus traits that govern co-infection numbers .
Results will show whether a host species can limit the number of co-infecting viruses , and whether viruses restrict entry of certain other virus species depending on their genetic relatedness.Results of this project are widely applicable because viruses are important disease agents in animals , plants , and bacteria .
The lifestyle of the project virus is similar to that of many human viruses ( such as influenza and HIV ) .
Therefore , the project data should contribute greatly to a better understanding of the generalized role of virus co-infection in human illnesses .
0201351Richards-KortumFunding is sought to enable graduate students , post-doctoral fellows and young investigators to participate in the Lasers in Medicine and Biology Gordon Conference Kimball Union Academy , Meriden , NH July 14-19 , 2002 .
The conference is to include investigators from academia , government agencies , national laboratories , and industry in examining emerging applications of lasers and optical sciences in medicine and surgery .
Particular emphasis is given to technological advances close to clinical application and/or commercial development .
Sessions include Optical Coherence Tomography ; Nanotechnologies for Optical Sensing , Imaging , and Manipulation ; Biological Applications of Micro-optical Devices ; Combined Imaging Methodologies ; Fluorescence Methods for Biomedical Diagnostics ; Advances in Optical Microscopy ; Intra-vital Imaging and Microscopy ; Wavefront Sensing and Adaptive Optics in Vision Correction ; and Photodynamic Therapy .
Seven of the nine program sessions include at least one talk with substantial applications in the area of early diagnosis .
An important feature is to bring students and post-doctoral fellows in biomedical engineering together with academic engineers and scientists , clinicians , and members of industry to discuss and define the most important questions and problems to be solved in this field .
Two special symposia will facilitate the discussion process .
The first symposium , Career Paths in Biomedical Engineering , features short presentations from clinicians and engineers in academia , industry , and government to provide career advice to graduate students and post- doctoral fellows .
The second symposium highlights new technologic developments on the cusp of clinical viability .
A special issue of the Journal of Biomedical Optics is to be devoted to Optical Detection Clinical and Industrial Advances .
The meeting is of high intellectual merit with the program being organized so as to focus on emerging medical technologies holding a high likelihood of making broad and important impacts on medicine and surgery .
This project , submitted under the Small Grant for Exploratory Research ( SGER ) program , will examine public attitudes toward immigration and civil liberties following the attack on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon .
In particular , this project will examine public attitudes regarding the freedoms of Muslims in the United States , as well as public attitudes about the arrival of new immigrants from Muslim countries .
Using a panel survey of 1,000 adult respondents , the principal investigator will probe attitudes toward security and freedom .
A split sample design will be employed to determine differences in attitudes toward restrictions on freedom broadly in contrast to those applied to Muslims .
The principal investigator will also test hypotheses about attitudes on immigration .
In addition to economic and social explanations of these attitudes , the survey will allow the study of feelings of personal safety .
0201841KirkpatrickThe proposal focused on continued development and implementation of a high resolution , imaging laser speckle-based strain gauge for biomedical research and medical diagnostic purposes .
During the period of this award , the investigators propose to expand the useful range of the system to the level of single cells and single-cell thick cell layers and to develop and implement an optical means by which the viscoelastic properties of tissues and cell sheets can be measured directly in a nondestructive manner .
The hypotheses driving this research are 1 ) Improved laser speckle strain measurement technology can provide detailed information on the mechanical behavior of tissues at the cellular level with better strain resolution than strain technologies conventionally employed for these purposes , including classical interferometric technologies , 2 ) Variations of the speckle strain gauge can yield information regarding the viscoelastic constants of biological tissues such as mechanical loss factor ( tan d ) , storage modulus , and loss modulus and 3 ) The strain gauge technology can be modified to provide full 2D strain data of tissues under biaxial loading .
The specific aims to test these hypotheses are 1 ) To implement an imaging laser speckle strain gauge for evaluating the micromechanical behavior of single-cells and cell sheets , 2 ) To develop a variation of the speckle strain gauge to yield viscoelastic constants such as loss factor ( tan d ) , storage modulus and loss modulus and 3 ) To modify the speckle strain gauge to acquire and analyze 2-dimensional strain data .
Results of the studies should have a significant impact on a variety of modern diagnostic and therapeutic applications .
This award supports theoretical research and education on topological defects in condensed matter physics .
Research will focus on three areas ( 1 ) The PI will use results from the previous grant period related to the forces acting on quantized vortices to make detailed studies of vortices in liquid helium , in dilute systems of trapped atoms , and in superconductors .
A clear understanding of the vortices in superconductors is particularly important , as it is the dynamics of vortices that primarily determines dissipation of energy in superconducting magnets .
( 2 ) Trapped atoms at low temperatures will be studied with an aim to understand what happens when the interactions are not very weak , and to understand how the rotational motion observed in such systems relates to rotational motion in superfluid helium and to the penetration of magnetic flux in superconductors .
( 3 ) The PI will continue work on the construction of a theory of the size of corrections to topological quantum numbers .
It is supposed that corrections to flux quantization in superconductors and to quantization of electrical conductance in the quantum Hall effect can readily be made negligibly small ; modern determinations of fundamental constants are based on the precision of the Josephson voltage-frequency relation and of the integer quantum Hall effect .
The PI intends to examine more closely the corrections to quantization in the Josephson effects for neutral superfluids , and the possible edge corrections to the quantum Hall effect. % % % This award supports theoretical research and education on topological defects in a wide range of condensed matter systems .
Topological defects play a fundamental and ubiquitous role in condensed matter and materials physics .
They are key players in dissipation processes in superconductors and in determining the mechanical strength of materials .
This award is concerned with fundamental aspects of topological defects and has an emphasis on the study of a particular kind of topological defect , vortices in superfluids and superconductors .
'Superfluid ' includes not only the traditional superfluid states of the helium liquids that occur upon cooling to very low temperatures , but also the quantum coherent states recently realized in dilute gases of alkali atoms .
The latter is not only of fundamental interest but contributes to the emerging area of quantum coherence control ; quantum computing may be viewed as an application in this area .
*** ABSTRACTThermal barrier coatings ( TBCs ) offer the potential of increased performance for high temperature applications such as diesel engines , gas turbines and aircraft engines .
Compositionally graded TBCs offer an excellent alternative to enhance the resistance to thermomechanical damage by providing a gradual transition in properties through the coating thickness .
The objective of this project is to study analytically and experimentally , compositionally graded material systems of similar thermal resistances , but different architectures .
At high temperatures , thermally activated time-dependent ( viscoplastic ) effects in the lower layers comprised of ceramic/bond coat alloy mixtures are expected to become significant .
Therefore it is proposed to ( 1 ) develop new models that allow the prediction of viscoplastic behavior of zirconia-bond coat alloy mixtures ; ( 2 ) to use these models to study the time-dependent behavior , crack initiation and propagation in compositionally graded TBC systems of similar thermal resistances ; ( 3 ) to perform controlled experiments with high heat fluxes that provide verification of the analytical predictions .
The results are expected to yield design guidelines that would allow TBC designers to optimize the architecture of graded TBC systems to achieve improved durability for specific temperature loading conditions .
In addition , these investigations will enhance basic scientific knowledge in the areas of viscoplastic deformation and fracture in two-phase and compositionally graded material systems .
This new knowledge will be incorporated in undergraduate and graduate courses and help in the education of women and minority undergraduate students with the possibility they may embark on graduate studies .
This project develops an innovative framework that incorporates asset condition evaluation techniques for more effective infrastructure reporting .
The research design includes the development of a life-cycle model for condition assessment of wastewater infrastructure , prioritization of the scheduling of maintenance and rehabilitation , including demand for such infrastructure , and developing and maintaining an up-to-date inventory of wastewater infrastructure .
Traditionally , governmental agencies at the local and the state level have used cash accounting methods to report infrastructure assets ( roads , bridges , water and sewer facilities , etc .
) In this method of financial reporting of infrastructure , the value of existing physical assets does not appear on financial reports .
The rapid rate of deterioration of municipal infrastructure assets is forcing owners to examine the state of their assets and plan for the future .
With the issuance of the Governmental Accounting Standards Board 's Statement 34 ( GASB 34 ) in June 1999 , local and state agencies are now required to report on the existing value of the agency 's capital assets .
This will entail developing consistent methodologies for condition assessment , deploying asset management systems , and preparing estimates of future demands and enhancements .
The framework developed through this project will help municipalities take advantage of the GASB 34 modified approach to infrastructure reporting .
It can contribute to improvements in the assessment and management of underground infrastructure systems since municipalities will be able to evaluate the cost-effectiveness of long-term rehabilitation of assets versus replacement of assets .
There will also be a shift in focus from capital formation to an emphasis on rehabilitation .
This project will be done in cooperation with the Department of Public Works , City of Indianapolis , Indiana .
This collaboration will be an asset not only in providing access to data for the development of the comprehensive models , but also for testing the results and transferring them to state and local governments .
In response to the national need for information technology workers with expertise in information systems security , this project is developing an associate degree program in computer security and data assurance at Norwalk Community College .
The new program leads students either to immediate employment or to a related four-year degree at Western Connecticut State University.In developing the curriculum , investigators are examining existing computer security curricula and standards in order to adapt and build on exemplary resources .
The investigators are also introducing a faculty externship program , which provides faculty members with relevant workplace experiences so they can better prepare their students for careers in the computer security field .
Although the project 's primary audience is two-year college faculty and students , the goal is to create a computer security career pathway from secondary schools to two-year colleges and on to universities .
Objectives and activities in the project include* adapting computer security curricula to create a career pathway from secondary schools to two-year colleges and four-year universities ; * implementing an externship program for faculty ; * creating practical lab experiences with a Unix/NT anti-hackers lab and teleconferencing equipment for distance learning ; * utilizing a faculty externship and student outreach coordinator to administer externship placements and recruit students for the computer security program ; * disseminating the computer security materials , curriculum , and model throughout Connecticut ; and* hosting an annual cybersecurity conference.The project is guided by an advisory committee of representatives from business and industry , professional associations in the computer security field , other colleges and universities , and law enforcement .
This award supports the purchase of an Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer , an Autoanalyzer , and related peripheral equipment for the stable isotope laboratory at Boston University .
The laboratory provides service for a significant number of researchers at the University and at other institutions in the area who use stable isotope analysis to answer questions in ecosystem ecology , animal physiology , marine food web dynamics , coastal biogeochemistry , and paleo-oceanography .
Besides increasing basic knowledge in these areas , the data to be obtained will contribute to the management of highly eutrophied coastal areas and to pest control practices in agriculture .
CMS-0201015PI Mary RothInstitution Lafayette CollegeTitle Collaborative Research Evaluation of 2D vs 3D Multielectrode Resistivity for the Characterization of Shallow KarstSinkholes in areas with soluble bedrock ( e.g. , limestone and dolomite ) are a cause of cost overruns during construction and of structural failures .
These areas can be found in 15 % of the United States and estimated costs of failures caused by sinkholes in eastern central Pennsylvania since 1975 exceed 30 million dollars .
The frequency of these problems can be reduced by improving methods for locating subsurface voids that cause sinkholes .
Two-dimensional earth-resistivity testing has been demonstrated to be useful , but because 2D geometry is assumed , this method has limited ability to determine void size and orientation .
Features adjacent to the 2D resistivity line and directly below the line affect the results .
Three-dimensional resistivity tests are time-consuming and do not provide sufficient detail for geotechnical investigations unless thousands of electrodes are used.In this project , interpretation of resistivity data is being improved by comparing two field methods .
The first method incorporates multiple 2D resistivity lines into three-dimensional models .
The second method develops large 3D data sets from multiple smaller , overlapping 3D surveys .
Both approaches should be able to determine void geometry by developing a 3D resistivity model from data collected with a practical number of electrodes .
To test the methods , the geometry of a natural subsurface cave is being mapped and resistivity results over the cave are compared to actual cave geometry .
The project will result in an improved investigation strategy for sites located in sinkhole areas .
Two additional features of this project should be noted .
First , the project is being conducted at a site that has been used by other researchers .
Further characterization of the conditions at the site will encourage additional collaboration to test new investigation methods .
Second , the project involves collaboration of an undergraduate institution with a graduate institution .
Such collaboration will encourage students to obtain post-graduate education .
This project will use a number of indices to study the asymmetric ring current in the Earth 's inner magnetosphere .
The indices to be used include Asym-H , Dst , VBs , and AL .
The analysis will use a combination of case histories , statistical analysis , superposed epoch analysis , linear prediction filtering , LT-UT maps of magnetic perturbations and inversion of line current models of storm time currents .
One hypothesis to be tested is that there is no systematic westward propagation of ground perturbations following substorm expansions as the standard substorm models suggests there should be .
A database of events used in this analysis will be made available to the scientific community .
0201736BarrettThe purpose of this project is to provide a meaningful design experience for University of Wyoming , College of Engineering students that will directly aid individuals with disabilities within the state of Wyoming .
This activity will provide a vital link between the University 's talented students and individuals with assistive technology needs .
Students will create and provide prototype , custom designed devices that will enhance the quality of life for the individual .
Also , this program will educate new design engineers on the special needs of community members with disabilities .
The project has the following objectivesProvide engineering students a multi-disciplinary , meaningful , community service experienceProvide persons with disabilities assistive devices to empower them to achieve the maximum individual growth and development and afford them the opportunity to participate in all aspects of lifeProvide engineering students education and awareness on the special needs and challenges of persons with disabilitiesProvide undergraduate engineering students exposure to the biomedical field of engineering.The College of Engineering has partnered with three organizations that provide education and service related to disability .
The organizations are the Wyoming Institute for Disabilities ( WIND ) assistive technology program , Wyoming New Options in Technology ( WYNOT ) and their Sports and Outdoor Assistive Recreation ( SOAR ) project along with the university 's Special Education program .
Individuals with disabilities will be linked with a team of engineering students to provide a prototype custom-designed assistive device specific to their needs .
The goal of the project is to investigate the behavior ofFourier transforms under various restrictions and to obtainsharper estimates of Fourier transforms and Periodizations.The research will be focused on two main objectives .
Thefirst one is to obtain new versions for the UncertaintyPrinciple in Harmonic Analysis .
The Uncertainty Principleis a statement which says that a function and its Fouriertransform can not be simultaneously concentrated on smallsets .
The famous Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle inQuantum Mechanics is one of the examples of the more general Uncertainty Principle in Harmonic Analysis .
In particular , the investigator will study functions with Fouriertransforms supported on sets with certain type of densitiesto get new versions of the Uncertainty Principle and applythe results for Partial Differential Equations and SignalProcessing .
The second objective is devoted to the relationbetween functions and their periodizations over integerlattices in higher dimensions .
Periodizations are oftenused in Harmonic Analysis as a link between Fourier seriesand Fourier integrals .
They arise in problems havingperiodic structure that is why they are an important toolin such applied sciences as Electrical Engineering , SignalProcessing and Crystallography .
In this proposal the investigator studies variousproperties of Fourier transforms .
The Fourier transform isa major mathematical tool extensively used to represent , convert and recover digital data , information and signalsin Signal Processing , Computer Science and ElectricalEngineering , Crystallography and Tomography .
The authorproposes to further investigate properties of Fouriertransformations which should lead to a deeper understandingof the behavior of Fourier transforms under variousrestrictions .
The development of the proposed UncertaintyPrinciple in Harmonic Analysis will lead to tools to determinehow much information is sufficient to recover signals anddata .
In return , this study of Fourier transforms will givenew techniques not only in theoretical areas such asMathematical Physics , in particular , Partial DifferentialEquations but also in applied sciences such as ImageProcessing , Electrical Engineering and Numerical Methods .
Investigation into the geomicrobiology of deep continental rocks is still at its infancy , partly due to the high cost of the deep continental drilling .
This project takes full advantage of the recently initiated Chinese Continental Scientific Drilling project to obtain rock cores from depth up to 5000 m in a geologically complex tectonic setting , plate subduction zone .
Previous geological studies have revealed ultra high-pressure metamorphic rocks and minerals in this region , along with abundant fluids and gas in fractures and fault zones .
We propose to study abundance and diversity of microbes in metamorphic rocks and their impact on geological and geochemical processes .
We will develop procedures of sample processing , including detection of contamination , sample preservation , and extraction of microbes from crystalline rocks .
Chemical and microbial tracers will be used to evaluate contamination of rock cores by surface microbes .
Pristine subsurface rocks will be used to determine microbial biomass by the phospholipid fatty acid method .
Attempts will be made to extract DNA from uncontaminated rock cores , followed by sequencing and identification .
Culturability of microbes in rock cores will be assessed .
0201961TeshThis award to Skidaway Institute of Oceanography in the State of Georgia provides instrumentation to significantly improve the oceanographic research capabilities of the new research vessel Savannah , operated by SkIO as part of the University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System research fleet .
The award supports acquisition of sensors to be used in the vessel 's surface mapping system and on its CTD system , as well as an uninterruptible power supply .
All of these are shared-use capabilities that are available to all funded users of the R/V Wecoma .
These improvements will be of substantial advantage to marine scientists during 2002 and future years .
*** A broad program of research in elementary particle physics and an associated education and outreach program is proposed by a research group of the University of Chicago Physics Department .
Their program includes the ATLAS detector construction project , which will be at the energy frontier at CERN 's Large Hadron Collider ; the CDF collaboration that shared in the discovery of the top quark at the Fermilab proton-antiproton collider and is operating at the current energy frontier ; the OPAL collaboration , which was operating at LEP , the highest energy electron-positron collider , which is performing stringent tests of theoretical models ; and the KTeV experiment , investigating the asymmetry of matter and antimatter in the universe .
Education and Outreach activities include TAMS ( Teacher 's Academy for Mathematics and Science ) which is becoming internationally known for its positive impact on under-achieving schools , and Quarknet , which is making high- school teachers a respected part of the particle physics research community .
The proposed work aims at developing a comprehensive theory for the robust control of both linear and nonlinear systems .
A new approach will be investigated that uses a real-time nonlinear estimator to determine model-error corrections to the control input .
The estimator determines the model error using a one time-step ahead approach .
Also , the estimator can be used to determine state quantities .
Control compensation is achieved by using the estimated model error as a signal synthesis adaptive correction to the nominal control input so that maximum performance is achieved in the face of significant model uncertainty and disturbance inputs .
A significant advantage of this approach over other adaptive methods is that model parameters need not be updated online .
Instead , the effect of these errors is used to update the actual control signal , which leads to a simple design strategy .
The novel part of the control approach is that it combines a nonlinear estimator and a nonlinear controller in a cohesive approach to provide system robustness .
The design procedure is straightforward , unlike other methods such as standard adaptive control methods that may involve extensive design procedures to guarantee performance specifications .
The impact of this proposed work will be the development of a methodology that is at once of basic theoretical value and will enable a large class of system applications in engineering applied science .
Additionally , Prof. Crassidis will be engaged in both international collaborations and workshops for dissemination of this research .
Proposal Number DMS-0201435PI Donald Marshall and Steffen RohdeABSTRACTConformal mapping and Loewner evolutionsMarshall and Rohde will investigate conformal mappings generated by the Loewner differential equation , and related topics .
TheLoewner differential equation describes the flow associated withthe conformal mappings onto a continuously decreasing sequence ofsimply connected planar domains .
It relates a sequence of domainsto a real-valued function , the driving term of the equation.Schramm 's recent discovery of the stochastic Loewner evolutionSLE , the Loewner equation driven by one-dimensional Brownianmotion , has opened up a new area of investigations involvingconformal mappings , probability theory and mathematical physics.The Loewner equation is also related to an algorithm fornumerical conformal mapping.Conformal mappings have applications in many areas , both within and outside of mathematics , such as control theory , heatconduction , fluid dynamics , and complex dynamics .
They are oftenused to change coordinates from one region to a simpler regionlike a disc .
Regions with smooth boundaries are well understood.However , the appearance of fractals in many branches of science led to the natural problem of investigating regions bounded by highly nonsmooth , fractal curves , from the conformal mappingpoint of view .
In recent years , fractal curves generated byrandom processes arising , for instance , in statistical physics , have received enormous attention .
The core of Marshall 's andRohde 's research is to better understand random fractal curvesby means of conformal mappings , and conversely to study someproblems about conformal mappings by analyzing domains boundedby fractal curves .
This award will focus on the analysis of the dynamic behavior and wave propagation characteristics of cellular solids with deterministic periodic architecture .
The resulting periodic assembles generate frequency bands and directions where elastic waved do not propagate ( stop bands ) and the corresponding vibrations and sound radiation are substantially reduced .
The scalable geometry of deterministic periodic architectures allows for their application as innovative vibration control/hazard mitigation systems both to small-scale and large-scale structural systems.Particular emphasis will be placed in the analysis of honeycombs with re-entrant architectures .
Their unique mechanical properties will be fully investigated emphasizing their potential for vibration hazard mitigation as well as impact energy absorption .
Efficient use of the intervening space will be also addressed for improving performance.This award is a multidisciplinary and collaborative research effort , where analytical computational and experimental work will be interlaced .
The PIs will collaborate throughout the duration of the project in teaching common courses and in developing a new advanced course in Passive and Active Structural Control .
This team effort will foster both civil and mechanical engineering students ' multidisciplinary background .
The concept and the results of this award will be progressively introduced in several courses of instruction in order to expose the students to innovative research ideas and their applications .
The student will be given hands-on experience that will contribute to the growth of their technical and professional skills .
0201271KleinstreuerThe knowledge of detailed and accurate deposition of toxic particles in the human respiratory system is most important for toxicologists and regulatory agencies to use in evaluating possible health effects , especially in vulnerable population groups such as industrial workers , children , and the elderly .
For drug aerosols , it is desirable to predict where and at what concentration the medicine reaches targeted lung areas .
In this project an experimentally validated computer simulation model will be developed to predict and analyze micron and submicron aerosol transport in representative human conducting zones.Computer simulations and analyses of airflow , particle transport , and particle deposition such as to be made in this project are invaluable tools to provide answers to research problems in both toxic particles and aerosol areas .
The computational fluid-particle dynamics studies to be conducted are most useful for ( a ) quantitative exposure-dose-and-health-effect studies done by regulatory agencies ; ( b ) hypotheses/effect testing , e.g. , air-particle inlet conditions , airway geometry features , and particle characteristics ; ( c ) comparison studies on particulate matter deposition in upper airways between people with respiratory diseases ( i.e. , partially occluded airways ) and normal individuals ; ( d ) the development of transient one-dimensional particle deposition models for whole-lung representations ; as well as ( e ) for medical researchers interested in biological impact analyses of toxic or therapeutic aerosols ; and ( f ) for the development of drug aerosol inhalers and subsequent lung site targeting or interest to manufacturers and pharmaceutical companies.Dissemination of results from the investigations will be made through peer-reviewed journal articles , review chapters , conference presentations , and fluid-particle flow visualizations to impact textbook writing , teaching , and learning .
0201744SchmidtThe long-term goal of this Investigator Initiated effort is to engineer improved therapies to aid peripheral nerve repair , with the hypothesis that vascularization at the site of nerve injury is a key step .
The objectives of this project are to develop methods to modulate angiogenesis in a nerve repair model and to assess the relationship between new blood vessel growth and nerve fiber regeneration .
Critical to the success of the project is formulation of a degradation resistant hydrogel containing hyaluronic acid ( HA ) , a biological polymer that is known to promote angiogenesis but is broken down very quickly in the body .
Specific aims are 1 ) develop and characterize HA hydogels , 2 ) quantify and optimize the angiogenic potential of HA hydrogels , and 3 ) use the HA hydrogels to study the effects of varying vascularization on peripheral nerve regeneration via rat embryo dorsal root ganglion assays and in vivo rat sciatic nerve regeneration analyses .
0201278BornhopUnder this exploratory research project , a new contrast agent that specifically labels glioma cells and that can provide both MRI and fluorescence signatures will be developed .
This proposal seeks to capitalize on the observations that human glial tumors display a high density of peripheral benzodiazepine receptor ( PBR ) binding sites and that the conjugable form of the PBR ligand PK-11195 will preferentially bind to human primary brain tumors .
Thus , a new contrast agent ( Ln-Q-Y-CTMR-PK11195 ) that will pass the blood brain barrier and selectively label viable glioma cells will be possible through chemical conjugation of unique polyazamacrocyclic lanthanide chelating agents ( Ln-Q-Y-CTMR ) to the peripheral benzodiazepine receptor ligand , PK-11195 .
Under this exploratory effort , cocktails of both the Gd 3+ containing complex to provide macroscopic scale images by MRI , and the Eu 3+ or Tb 3+ species to give microscopic scale fluorescence images from the same tissue will be developed .
After the synthesis has been accomplished , specific uptake by PBR expressing glioma cells in-vitro will be established and the influence of linker chain length on complex stability will be investigated .
0201923LaurencinThis research effort is aimed at developing useful biomimetic constructs for bone while furthering our fundamental understanding of factors important in determining the success of these designs .
A multidisciplinary tissue engineering approach is to be followed using principles from chemical , mechanical , and materials engineering as well as cell and molecular biology .
The development of constructs of this sort is expected to have clinical applications in grafting of non-unions , surgical arthrodeses , cranio-facial defects , and prosthetic implants and/or implant coatings.This research project builds on the knowledge produced during a series of research projects directed by the Principal Investigator dating from 1990 .
This new project seeks to design , develop and optimize three-dimensional matrices for use in bone repair .
The first aim is to explore the development of new polymer-ceramic constructs fabricated by direct synthesis and incorporation of amorphous calcium phosphate into microspheres used to form the matrix , as well as optimize physicochemical parameters surrounding these new composite microspheres .
In the second aim , the delivery of growth factors will also be studied further , building on the previous work by incorporating proteins and factors into the matrix that may enhance cellular endothelialization and bone growth .
Finally , in the third aim , extensive in vivo studies will be performed utilizing the constructs designed from aims 1 and 2 , paying careful attention to the mechanical strength of the healing defect and the short- and long-term histology and histomorphometry of the defect site.From a basic science standpoint , studies under this work have provided and will continue to provide a better understanding of polymer and ceramic chemistry as it relates to cellular response , matrix fabrication , and ultimate matrix performance ( both in vitro and in vivo ) .
In addition to furthering our basic science knowledge , the development of matrices for bone tissue engineering may lead to graft materials for healing bony defects , and thus provide direct benefits to society .
As one of only a handful of underrepresented minority principal investigators in bioengineering in America , the Principal Investigator is committed to encouraging the academic growth of younger minority undergraduate and graduate students currently so underrepresented in science .
DMS Award AbstractAward # 0201669PI Xu , YuanInstitution University of OregonProgram Applied MathematicsProgram Manager Catherine MavriplisTitle Cubature Formulae and Orthogonal Polynomials in Several VariablesThe aim of this project is to study various aspects of cubature formulae ( CF ) , synonym for higher dimensional numerical integration formulae , and orthogonal polynomials of several variables ( OP ) .
The project calls for a study of cubature formula from an algebraic point of view as well as new constrction method , such as through studying of polynomial interpolation in several variables .
It also proposes to investigate further properties of OP with respect to weight functions on various regular domains , such as the cube , the ball , the simplex and the sphere .
The aim is to uncover further hidden properties of CF and OP , and to find closed formulae and explicit construction , so that further theoretic results and methods with practical implication can be built upon.Cubature Formulae ( CF ) and Orthogonal Polynomials ( OP ) of several variables have fruitful connections with many branches of applied mathematics such as numerical integration , approximation , coding theory , data fitting , combinatorics and statistics , to name a few , as well as with areas such as harmonic analysis , group representation , computational algebraic geometry and differential equation .
CF itself is essential for practical evaluation of high dimensional integrals , which is one of the basic questions in numerical analysis and is often taken as a test problem in high speed computing .
The proposed project seeks new understanding in the nature of CF and OP in several variables , and it aims at workable results that have practical implications , such as new method for constructing CF .
Date June 18 , 2002 This award supports theoretical research and education in the area of strongly correlated electron systems .
Research will focus on fundamental issues in two areas high temperature superconductivity and quantum magnetism .
The work in the former area has a more phenomenological bent includes the study of the why a magnetic moment appears with the addition of a nonmagnetic impurity and various issues related to transport properties in d-wave superconductors .
Of particular interest is the physical origin of the experimentally observed scaling relation for the thermal hall conductivity and the appearance of a finite Nernst effect above the superconducting transition temperature .
The study of quantum magnetism will emphasize understanding the role of quantum fluctuations .
Of particular interest is the study of the Capriotti state and the conditions under which a spin liquid ground state might exist. % % % This award supports theoretical research in condensed matter physics with a focus on the physics of electrons in high temperature superconductors and other materials with strong electronic correlations .
The research involves the creation of fundamental new knowledge and concepts in condensed matter theory that contribute to the formation of the pillars that support future technologies .
More specifically , research will use the study of aspects of thermal and electronic transport properties in high temperature superconductivity to illuminate the fundamental nature of the strongly correlated state and that of the d-wave superconducting state that arises below the superconducting transition .
Theoretical work is needed both to interpret experimental discoveries and to guide the search for new materials and new phenomena .
This award also supports advanced training at the frontiers of condensed matter theory .
*** ABSTRACTCompact Value Functions for Value-Based Control of Distributed SystemsThis project will extend the P1 's work on a previous NSF grant on intelligent control for distributed systems .
That previous grant started from recent results in value-based intelligent control , sometimes called approximate dynamic programming ( ADP ) or reinforcement learning ( RL ) .
Older forms of control typically guarantee stability , under certain theoretical assumptions , but do not focus on optimal performance .
The new methods focus on optimal performance , without assuming linearity or perfect knowledge of system dynamics.By using new model-based versions of ADP or RI , and by developing value approximation schemes suitable for distributed systems , he was able to demonstrate new levels of performance in test problems in distributed tasks such as fluid flow control and missile interception .
The new project is intended to be the first stage in addressing larger and more general distributed control problems , such as manufacturing processes , job scheduling , network traffic , etc .
The first stage will be to explore more powerful value approximation schemes , in order to enhance the ability to control systems governed by partial differential equations , such as fluid flows encountered in aerospace , plasma and industrial applications , to the extent possible in a small-scale exploratory effort .
Although the role of magnesium ( Mg2+ ) in biochemical and physiological processes is more widely appreciated now than it ever was , huge gaps remain in our understanding of normal Mg2+ physiology .
Compared to our understanding of the multifarious roles of calcium , our understanding of the molecular , biochemical and physiological roles of Mg2+ are woefully inadequate .
For example , Mg2+ concentrations are tightly regulated inside cells , but the mechanism of Mg2+ entry into cells is entirely unknown .
No Mg2+-channel has been identified to this date , and the first membrane Mg2+ transporter ( channel , carrier , or pump ) has yet to be isolated .
As to Mg2+ outside cells , Mg2+ concentrations in the blood ( plasma ) are tightly regulated ( like calcium ) , but a Mg2+ hormone has not been discovered to date .
Hence it is important that new , young investigators of magnesium biology are encouraged intellectually and supported financially .
This award provides funds to support the travel of 12 young molecular biologists to present posters of their work at the 8th Gordon Conference on Magnesium in Biological Processes and Medicine to be held in Ventura CA from Feb. 3 to Feb. 8 , 2002 .
In view of the promise that molecular biology holds for our understanding of magnesium in basic processes of life ( photosynthesis , the stabilization of DNA and proteins , the activation of over 300 cell enzymes ) , the NSF funds will be earmarked for young investigators who study the basic science of magnesium .
The funds will be used to subsidize their travel and/or conference fees at the level of $ 600 each .
This new cadre of magnesium investigators will be selected according to three criteria 1 ) they must have published a significant paper on the chemistry , physiology , or molecular biology of magnesium in the past 3 years , 2 ) they must be new to the Magnesium Gordon Research Conference , and 3 ) they are likely to make a long-term commitment to basic research on the physiology , biochemistry and molecular biology of magnesium .
The recruitment and the nurturing of young investigators are particularly appropriate for the Gordon Conferences that focus on the Frontiers of Science .
ABSTRACT0201770Paul S. WangKent State UThe Kent State University requests a three year research grant to support research on InternetAccessible Mathematical Computation ( IAMC ) and Web-based Mathematics Education ( WME ) .The research will be conducted by Professor Paul S. Wang as Principal Investigator and two grad-uateresearch assistants .
The proposed effective date is August 1 , 2002.The proposed work extends progress already made , by the PI 's group and others , in makingmathematical computations easily accessible and conveniently interoperable on the Internet .
Theresearch involves protocol specification , design and implementation of prototypes , architecture ofa WME system , and design/implementation of a WME content authoring language .
The resultshave great potential for scientific research and mathematics education .
This project concerns birational geometry of complex varieties and the study of rationally connected varieties .
The main objective is to study spaces of rational curves on rationally connected varieties , with the goal of constructing new birational invariants of these varieties and determining the relationship between these varieties and unirational varieties .
The secondary objective is to develop further some of the techniques and tools of algebraic geometry to develop techniques for determining when moduli stacks are rationally connected , to construct and study new compactifications of the space of smooth rational curves in projective space , and to refine the Behrend-Manin stratification of the Kontsevich moduli stack so that it detects mutliple covers.Systems of polynomial equations in some collection of variables arise in every branch of mathematics , science and engineering .
Determining the solutions of these systems of equations is of paramount importance .
Unirational varieties precisely correspond to those systems of equations where the set of solutions is most easily described -- the set of solutions is the set of all outputs of some sequence of polynomials with arbitrary inputs .
So it is very important to recognize which systems of equations correspond to unirational varieties .
From the point of view of geometry , a closely related notion is rational connectedness .
This notion is far simpler to recognize in practice .
Potentially both notionsare equivalent .
If one could prove that both notions areequivalent , this would give a simpler way to recognize which systems of equations correspond to unirational varieties .
The investigator intends to continue his research of this problem .
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -PI Tom Kennedy , University of ArizonaDMS 0201566AbstractThe first part of the project concerns self-avoiding walks in two dimensions and their relation to Schramm 's stochastic Loewner evolution process .
Schramm 's process is believed to describe the scaling limit ofa variety of two-dimensional models , including the self-avoiding walk.The pivot algorithm provides a fast method for simulating self-avoiding walks .
Recently , the principal investigator has found a new implementation of this algorithm that is as much as eighty times faster in two dimensions.This will be used to test both the conjectured conformal invariance of the self-avoiding walk and its equivalence with stochastic Loewner evolution .
A version of the weakly self-avoiding walk in which the penalty for self-intersections decays with the length of the loop produced by the self-intersection will be investigated by simulations and perturbative means .
The second part of the project concerns excited states in quantum spin systems .
Recent work by the principal investigator has developed a method for studying the dispersionrelation of one quasi-particle states and interface states in one dimension .
The method is based on assuming a certain ansatz for the wave function of the states and then proving there is indeed an eigenstate of thisform by a contraction mapping argument.This method will be used to study interface states in two dimensions and the excited states above these interface states .
Self-avoiding walks are random walks which are not allowed to visitthe same place more than once .
They provide a model for linear polymers in a dilute solution .
The interest in this model is , however , much broader since it is one of the simplest models that exhibits critical phenomena and in two dimensions conformal invariance .
Recently there has been an explosion of conjectures relating the self-avoiding walk and other two-dimensional models to a new two dimensional stochasticprocess , called stochastic Loewner evolution , introduced by Schramm.Part of the project will study many of these conjectures for the self-avoiding walk by Monte Carlo simulations and by perturbative methods .
The simulations will be done with a recent implementation of the pivot algorithm by the principal investigatorthat is much faster than previous implementations.This fast algorithm will also be used to study versions of the self-avoiding walk that are important in physical chemistry.Another part of the project is devoted to studying the low energy excitationsin a variety of quantum spin systems .
These are models of the behaviorof the electron spins in crystals .
At low temperatures the electronspins tend to align .
However , several domains may form within which the spins are aligned , but between which the spins point in opposite directions .
The interfaces between these domains will be studied by an approach which has proved very successful for studying one quasi-particle states .
In particular , the nature of the excitations just above the interface states will be investigated .
0201438FindleyThis award to University of Miami 's Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Sciences provides instrumentation to improve the shared-use scientific instrumentation available to researchers using three research ships operated by University of Miami and the Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institution .
These three vessels , R/Vs Seward Johnson , Seward Johnson II , and Walton Smith , are all operated as part of the University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System research fleet .
The specific instrumentation supported by this award includes a phased array , 75 kHz acoustic Doppler current meter for installation on R/V Seward Johnson II , and a multi-corer device for collecting undisturbed seafloor samples from any of the three ships .
These new capabilities will be of substantial advantage to marine scientists using the ships in their research during 2001 and future years .
*** 0201468 , Joseph Wartman , Drexel UniversityCollaborative Research Investigation of Site Effects , Seismic Compression , and Liquefaction in the June 23 , 2001 Southern Peru EarthquakeDuring the past 25 years , the largest seismic event worldwide was the Southern Peru Earthquake of June 23 , 2001 ( Mw = 8.4 ) .
It damaged regions in and around the cities of Moquegua , Tacna , Arequipa , Camana , and Ilo .
A collaborative team of United States and Peruvian researchers conducted a geotechnical reconnaissance of the region shortly after the event .
Among the key finding were ( i ) the concentration of structural damage in some areas suggested the influence of site and possibly topographic amplification in the resulting damage levels ; ( ii ) considerable damage occurred to roadways and bridges in the affected regions as a result of seismic compression , liquefaction , landslides , and rockfalls.Large magnitude seismic events such as the Southern Peru Earthquake provide an opportunity to advance the state of geotechnical earthquake engineering practice through the development and study of detailed case histories .
These case studies are invaluable for calibration of existing design procedures and seismic codes , and they often serve as a springboard for developing new , more reliable analysis procedures .
The objective of this collaborative research between Washington State University and Drexel University is to ( 1 ) document and study site amplification and topographic effects in the cities of Tacna and Moquegua ; ( 2 ) develop and analyze case histories of seismic compression of compacted fills ; and ( 3 ) assemble and evaluate case histories of liquefaction and associated lateral spreading .
The research plan takes advantage of the investigators ' current working relationship with the Catholic University of Peru , and from their contacts with local officials from government , engineering societies , and industry .
The research involves several tasks ( a ) development of representative ground motions , ( b ) characterization of subsurface conditions by test borings , shear wave velocity measurements , and laboratory experiments , ( c ) compilation and development of detailed case histories , ( d ) analysis of the case histories , and ( e ) timely dissemination of the data and findings .
The case histories and associated data will be freely available on a dedicated Internet site , which will be developed in both English and Spanish to make it accessible to individuals in both the Unites States and abroad.This research will provide the profession with a series of case studies that may be used for calibration or validation of existing design and analysis procedures .
It will also aid the development of new or updated analysis procedures and building design codes and seismic guidelines .
The findings will have implications for the seismic safety community worldwide , and will be particularly relevant to regions such as the Pacific Northwest and Alaska , where the seismic hazard is controlled by subduction events .
This U.S.-Czech research project involves two teams led by Carol Auer of the University of Connecticut and her counterparts in Prague , Vaclav Motyka and Radomira Vandova , from the Institute of Experimental Botany , Czech Academy of Sciences .
Their collaboration features examination of a group of plant hormones called cytokinins which influence plant growth .
Plants regulate the level of active cytokinin molecules within tissues and cells to achieve normal vegetative and reproductive development .
In the complex process of cytokinin homeostasis , the regulatory mechanism is the reversible or irreversible conjugation of cytokinins to sugar molecules .
This US-Czech effort looks at irreversible conjugation that down-regulates active cytokinin levels in cells.The goal is to biochemicaly characterize the enzyme N-glucosyltransferase ( N-GT ) so that we may understand its function in cytokinin homeostasis and plant development .
Radish and Arabidopsis are the primary experimental materials .
The Czech partners will define the biochemical properties and enzyme ( s ) of the regulatory pathway while isolation of mutants and eventually cloning of genes involved in N-GT will be conducted by the U.S. team members .
If successful , findings may be applicable in future efforts to manipulate plant growth and develop agricultural crops .
This international project in plant hormone research fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling experts in the Untied States and Central Europe to combine complementary talents and share research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence .
This research will study the incidence of civil unrest in Early Qing China , from the full establishment of the dynasty in 1645 to the beginning of its decline in 1795 .
A database of unrest events , state power , commercial development , and population to land ratios will be developed based on official records .
Comparisons over time and across areas will be used to evaluate political , economic , and ecological explanations of social unrest .
The results will be compared to similar studies of China in more turbulent earlier and later periods in order to evaluate whether the origins of the unrest that pushed China into its confrontation with modernity can be traced back to the Early Qing period .
The results will also be compared to studies of unrest in Japan and Europe in order to evaluate the multiple paths to modernity in the East and West .
A collaborative research and education relationship among Purdue University , University of Minnesota , and Xerox Corporation is being formed to engage in the high risk and high payoff task of developing new theoretical perspectives for sensing and control for the 39 billion on-demand printing industry .
The charge of the industry-university research team is to develop fundamental understanding of the sensing and control issues for digital color xerography and to develop practical and theoretically sound control systems that expand the operation envelop of printing systems while producing consistent , high quality prints in a predictable manner .
Our approach will 1 ) use existing models of human visual perception in control analysis and synthesis , 2 ) exploit process elements to maximize sensing and actuation opportunities , 3 ) use the principle of coordination to achieve the final performance objectives , and 4 ) exploit the transformation between spatial and temporal system representations .
The methodology and control-centric system approach developed by this endeavor will significantly improve the image quality of digital color xerography .
This technology will help propel the industry to a new era and maintain the competitive edge of the U.S. short-run and office printing industry .
The control strategies and design methodologies will be applicable to other printing and imaging systems , such as inkjet , image scanners and microscopy .
Proposal DMS-0201599Principal Investigator Qingbo Huang , Wright State UniversityABSTRACTThis mathematical research focuses on equations of Monge-Ampere type and fully nonlinear elliptic equations with geometric or physical motivation .
The first part of this projectis devoted to several equations of Monge-Ampere type .
In particular , we propose to study regularity of solutions and other quantitative properties such as the large time behavior of solutions and characterization of associated nonlinear semigroups for several parabolic Monge-Ampere equations arising in the deformation of surfaces , to develop regularity theory forweak solutions of degenerate Monge-Ampere equations and study its interaction with Monge-Kantorovich optimal mass transfer problem stemming from economics and other areas of science , and to consider an equation arising in geometric optics for the synthesis of reflector antennas.The second part of the project is concerned with fully nonlinear elliptic equationswithout concavity condition , regularity theory of weak solutions of Hessian equations , and the infinity Laplacian equation as the Euler equation of minimizing Lipschitz extension.This research is in the area of nonlinear partial differential equations .
These equations play a crucial role in the application of mathematics to real world .
Most phenomena in nature and society , such as heat transfer , flows in porous media , construction of reflectors , optimal disposition of air masses , are described by nonlinear partial differential equations.Study of these equations will greatly help understand the nature of these phenomena and develop practical , fast , and reliable numerical algorithms .
One of the proposed problems is related to Monge-Kantorovich optimal mass transfer problem appearing in economic , physics , and meteorology .
Another problem arises from the engineering problem ofconstruction of reflector antennas .
The parabolic Monge-Ampere equations are motivated from differential geometry and appear in the model of worn stones .
The proposed projecthas a strong connection with real harmonic analysis and differential geometry .
We expect that this research will stimulate more interplay among these areas .
AST-0201636Arras , PhilipDr .
Arras is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at the Institute for Theoretical Physics at the University of California Santa Barbara ( UCSB ) .
He will conduct theoretical studies of the tidal interactions between stars and planets .
His work will explore the tidal effect of the primary star on various orbiting objects close-in extrasolar planets , Jupiter-type planets , stars which are still forming , and ordinary low-mass stars .
He hopes to use his calculations to explain recent observations of extrasolar planets as well as observations of Jupiter 's atmosphere .
For his educational component , he will develop two new physics courses to be taught at UCSB a graduate course on galactic dynamics , and an undergraduate course on fluid mechanics called The Physics of California that will apply the material to local natural phenomena such as waves and earthquakes .
*** Under the direction of Dr. Michael A. Jochim , Ms Sarah McClure will collect data in eastern Spain for her doctoral dissertation .
She will conduct archaeological survey of the Canoles river valley in the Province of Valencia , Spain to identify changes in land use patterns during the transition from hunting and gathering to agricultural economies ( 8000-2500 BC ) .
Domestic plants ( wheat , emmer and legumes ) and animals ( goats , sheep , pigs and cows ) were introduced to the area by 5600 BC .
The remains of these domesticates are found in conjunction with the first ceramics of the region .
However , in stark contrast to other parts of the Mediterranean , the farmers of eastern Spain did not live in villages until over a millennium later .
The aggregation of people in villages indicates changes in their economies such as an intensification of agricultural practices and corresponding changes in social organization and cultural behavior .
Current research in the Province of Valencia suggests that this reconstruction of the transition to farming may well be biased , since it is based largely on information from individual sites ( caves and rockshelters ) .
Ms McClure will use a regional approach to characterize the timing and nature of the shift to village farming economies .
The primary aim of the study is to investigate the commonly held idea of a slow shift to intensified farming and to examine the social and ecological underpinnings of the transition .
The archaeological survey of the Canoles valley will elucidate the role available wild resources played in the transition to agriculture .
The Canoles valley is particularly suitable for this kind of analysis since it is a large valley connecting the Mediterranean coastal plain with the central plateau ( Meseta ) and contains a wealth of different ecological zones .
Land use patterns will indicate how people were using their landscape and how this changed with new forms of subsistence practices .
The transition to agriculture was a major turning point in human and environmental history , setting the stage for the rise of civilizations and changing the relationship between humans and their environment .
In order to understand this transition , archaeologists must look to different regions of the world to identify fundamental similarities and differences in the timing , tempo , and impact of the cultural and organizational changes associated with the transition to food producing economies .
Ms McClure 's research in eastern Spain will contribute to the understanding of this fundamental shift and will also assist in training a promising young scientist .
Maciej RadoszUniversity of WyomingPhase Behavior of Block and Graft Styrene Copolymers in Near Critical and Supercritical Solvents.The overall goal of this research is to understand the phase behavior of block and graft styrene copolymers in compressible fluids , such as near critical- and supercritical solvents and monomers .
Such understanding is needed not only to improve existing manufacturing processes , but also to develop new polymeric materials and new polymer processing approaches that are more efficient and more environmentally acceptable.This research is a synthesis of experiment and thermodynamic modeling .
The approach would be to 1 ) synthesize novel graft and block copolymers , such as polyisobutene-g-polystyrene ( PIBg-PS ) , polybutadiene-g-polystyrene ( PBD-g-PS ) , and polybutadiene-b-polystyrene ( PBDb-PS ) from atom transfer radical polymerization and living anionic polymerization followed by partial or complete hydrogenation ( for polymers containing polybutadiene ) ; 2 ) characterize these polymers upon microphase separation and bulk phase transitions ( fluid-liquid and fluid solid ) in high-pressure experiments ; and3 ) develop equation-of-state-based thermodynamic models that can explicitly account for and predict the phase behavior of graft and block copolymers.The research builds on a current NSF-funded project on fluid-solid equilibria in solutions of crystallizable polymers , and on a series of preliminary but promising seed experiments and computer simulations using recent versions of Statistical Associating Fluid Theory ( SAFT ) , such as SAFT1 , and a recent Lennard-Jones equation of state with self-consistent theoretical framework for vapor , liquid , and solid phases.This research could enhance our understanding of how the macromolecular structure affects the phase behavior of copolymers with complex backbone architecture .
Such understanding could provide a basis for future research on phase equilibria for other polymers with even more complex architecture , such as triblock copolymers and graft copolymers with double branches ( centipede ) , and more predictive thermodynamic models .
In addition to building a knowledge base in this area , and seeding future research , the project could have a broader impact on the existing and future commercial polymer technology .
For example , the theoretical model can be used to provide rapid predictions of cloud points , micelle formation , crystallization , and melting of graft or block copolymers in supercritical fluids .
Such predictions are needed to control desirable and undesirable phase transitions in production lines .
The model itself can also be used to optimize advanced polymerization schemes in supercritical fluids , such as ATRP and living anionic polymerization .
This may lead to unique products and efficient , environmentally benign processes .
Other examples of a broader social impact includecontributions to education ( graduate students and post-doctoral researchers ) and to broadening participation of underrepresented groups .
Yoonkook ParkTuskegee UniversityThe Nature of Molecular Association and Solvation of Aliphatic and Perfluorinated Aliphatic Carboxylic Acids Carboxylic acids are of significant importance in industry due to numerous uses as raw materials for other chemicals , as solvents , and in the drug , dye , textile and foodstuffs industries .
In addition , carboxylic acids play an important role in biological applications .
For example , short-chain fatty acids ( SCFAs ) such as acetic , propionic , iso- and n-butyric and iso- and n-valeric acids , serve as an indicator of bacterial activity .
Hence , analysis of SCFAs is of importance in studies of health and disease in the intestinal tract .
Fundamental molecular understanding of these acids can help in rational design of processes and products with desired properties .
In light of the need to improve the green engineering of processes involving these species , this proposal will focus on understanding the molecular behavior of carboxylic acids in supercritical fluids.Formic acid and SCFAs represent an interesting series of molecules that provide the opportunity to study and correlate molecular structure with the tendency for these molecules to self-associate .
However , solvation can have a tremendous impact on carboxylic acid self-association even in the case of carboxylic acids with modestly different alkyl groups .
The influence of solvents on dimerization of some carboxylic acids has been investigated by several research groups .
In earlier work , the PI and co-PIs used Fourier transform infrared ( FTIR ) spectroscopy and a modified lattice-fluid hydrogen-bonding ( MLFHB ) model to examine the effect of solvent density and solvation in formic acid association in both supercritical ( SC ) CO2 and C2H6 .
The results obtained indicated that in the presence of SC CO2 solvent , the association of formic acid decreased linearly with increases in solvent density .
The interaction of CO2 ( solvent ) with formic acid monomer ( solute ) has a marked effect on the dimer formation compared to that when ethane was employed as the solvent .
As a result of weaker solvent-solute interactions in ethane , the association constant of formic acid in C2H6 is thus an order of magnitude larger than that in CO2 .
The strong interactions of CO2 and carboxylic acid monomers has a tremendous effect on the equilibrium behavior .
In addition , this behavior has been successfully modeled by using the MLFHB model .
Specific Aims SC CO2 can interact strongly with certain molecules , particularly , those with electron donating functional groups .
In this study , the PIs will investigate the nature of molecular association and solvation of carboxylic acids .
This study is comprised of three main areas .
1 ) The association equilibrium constant ( KA ) of carboxylic acids at various densities in a variety of solvents ( e.g .
SCF CO2 and C2H6 ) will be determined using FTIR spectroscopy .
Dr. Park and his Tuskegee University undergraduate students will work with Dr. Roberts and his full-time Auburn Ph.D. student to collect the experimental data in the Roberts ' lab .
2 ) The specific interaction between CO2 and aliphatic ( and fluorinated aliphatic ) carboxylic acids in an inert solvent , such as pentane , will also be investigated in the Roberts ' lab as well as the Tuskegee laboratories .
Dr. Park and his students will identify the most probable interaction site between CO2 and aliphatic ( and fluorinated aliphatic ) carboxylic acids theoretically .
The experimentally obtained binding energies will be compared to those obtained from model potentials .
3 ) Molecular modeling of these systems will be carried out in Dr. Gupta 's lab to improve our fundamental understanding of the experimental results and to guide the experimental studies .
Both ab initio and equation of state approaches will be utilized .
Broader Impact These studies will be important in improving our understanding of solvent effects on carboxylic acid interactions in SCFs .
Understanding the fundamental molecular attributes of CO2 plays a role in rational design of inexpensive and green CO2-based processes .
Information about the specific interaction between CO2 and aliphatic ( and fluorinated aliphatic ) carboxylic acids will provide a guideline as to which factors should be considered to improve overall CO2-philicity .
The proposed research program presents multiple opportunities to develop students in the areas of molecular thermodynamics and green chemistry and engineering .
The mechanisms for this development include Ph.D. student and undergraduate student training , as well as incorporation of our findings and aspects of this ever important field of green chemistry within our molecular thermodynamics courses at both Tuskegee University and Auburn University .
There is now strong evidence that some of the most scientifically interesting and technologically promising phenomena exhibited by correlated systems occur near low temperature phase boundaries .
These phenomena include the spontaneous organization of mesoscale charge , spin , and orbital structures , and colossal sensitivities of physical properties to applied pressure and magnetic field .
A better understanding of these exotic phenomena demands greater insight into how the low energy dynamical properties evolve across the low temperature phase transitions of these materials .
This individual investigator award supports research that utilizes a unique method for using inelastic light scattering to spectroscopically explore - in a way not previously possible - the important evolution of the spin , charge , and lattice dynamics of correlated systems while pressure- and/or field-tuning through low temperature phase transitions .
The principle focus of this study will be on two classes of phenomena ( A ) Quantum phase transitions in complex oxides , to study the evolution and effects of spontaneous charge- , spin- , and orbital-organization near low temperature phase transitions .
( B ) Spin electronics in magnetic semiconductors , to explore the evolution and impact of magnetic cluster formation near phase transitions .
Not only will this research afford critical information about the dynamics near various low temperature phase transitions of technologically important materials , but it will provide the scientific community a greater understanding of the limitations and benefits of applying low-temperature/high-pressure light scattering for studying phase transitions and extreme phase regimes in a variety of systems .
Further , this project will train graduate student and postdoctoral researchers in cutting-edge pressure and spectroscopic techniques , eventually adding to the technical base of the country.Intensive recent research has uncovered a variety of functional materials exhibiting scientifically important phenomena with technologically promising properties , e.g. , in magnetic storage devices , magnetic sensors , switches , etc .
These exotic properties include extremely large sensitivities of the electrical properties to the application of magnetic fields ( colossal magnetoresistance ) , and abrupt magnetic field- and pressure-sensitive transitions between electrically-conducting and -non-conducting phases .
It is now believed that these exotic properties are likely caused by the spontaneous formation of nanometer-scale structures when these materials transition between conducting and non-conducting phases ; however , the nature of this causal connection needs to be significantly elucidated before scientists can understand how best to design these materials for technological advantage .
This individual investigator research project will utilize a unique method in which laser light is used to study how the magnetic-field- and pressure-dependent evolution of nanometer-scale structures give rise to the dramatic and technologically-useful properties in complex oxides and spin-electronic materials .
The information that will be obtained with this project is an essential prerequisite to the effective design and utilization of these materials as devices .
Further , this project will train graduate student and postdoctoral researchers in cutting-edge pressure and spectroscopic techniques , eventually adding to the important technical base of the country .
PI Krugh Institution University of RochesterThe award supports a Research Experiences for Undergraduates ( REU ) site integrated with a Research Experience for Teachers ( RET ) program at the University of Rochester for the summers of 2003-2005 .
Thomas R. Krugh is the site director .
Eight students will carry out research each summer over a ten-week period .
Six high school teachers will also participate in research at this site under the program , Research Experience for Teachers .
Recruitment will be targeted at undergraduate colleges and give special emphasis to participation of women , underrepresented minorities and lower division students .
Secondary school teachers will be recruited from a national pool .
All participants will carry out research under the supervision of faculty in the chemistry department .
The faculty are involved in interdisciplinary research which extends the intellectual scope of summer research to fields such as optics , biology , medicine and dentistry , pharmacy , engineering , physics and earth sciences .
Research group seminars and REU/RET group meetings during the summer will enhance training .
A mini-course on photoinduced charge transfer will be given .
Panel discussions will be organized to focus on career opportunities .
Students will report on their work subsequently at their colleges and at regional and national professional meetings .
The teachers remain in contact with the REU site through an STM ( scanning tunnel microscope ) project which encourages them to borrow the instrument for high school use .
They also maintain web pages on a server in the PIs lab .
The REU/RET site is funded by the Division of Chemistry and the Office of Multidisciplinary Affairs in the Mathematics and Physical Science Directorate .
The Fort Johnson Undergraduate Summer Research Program is a ten-week program combining formal classroom work with independent research in areas of crucial concern for marine biologists today .
The program is designed to provide undergraduate students with a modern research experience employing physiological , cellular and molecular techniques to address questions in areas such as species diversity , mechanisms of adaptation to environmental change , environmental bioindicators and microbial ecology .
The College of Charleston serves as primary host institution for the program , but research mentors and course instructors are drawn from among more than 100 Ph.D. scientists whose primary appointments lie in the Medical University of South Carolina , the National Institute of Standards and Technology , the National Ocean Service and the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources .
Working side-by-side with graduate students , technicians , and mentors at Fort Johnson , South Carolina , student participants are exposed to a broad range of career opportunities in science , making them better prepared to enter the workforce in industry and government .
In addition to providing students with an opportunity to conduct independent studies guided by a faculty mentor , the objectives of the program are ( 1 ) to engage students directly in discussing graduate school and career options in basic and applied sciences , ( 2 ) to show students the interdisciplinary nature of science and ( 3 ) to teach students to think critically.Undergraduate students are selected to participate in this program based on outstanding academic and personal achievement , evidence of advanced course work in physiology and cell or molecular biology and on the potential benefits of this research experience to the student .
Recruitment efforts cast a broad net , with particular emphasis on attracting women and minority students .
Participants are required to live on-site in dormitories at the Grice Marine Laboratory .
For the first four weeks of the program , students participate in a seminar course entitled Special Topics in the Physiology , Cell and Molecular Biology of Marine Organisms .
NSF covers the costs of registration and tuition , and students who successfully complete the course receive three transferable college credits through the College of Charleston .
Also , during the first four weeks , participants begin to work on independent research projects under the guidance of individual faculty mentors .
Projects are selected for their interdisciplinary and inter-institutional nature , and their relationship to current biological , biomedical or environmental concerns .
During the last six weeks of the summer , participants focus primarily on completing their research projects while learning skills for analyzing data and communicating the results of their work in oral and written presentations .
The program also provides a structured format for discussing issues related to graduate school and pursuit of a career in the sciences .
The program takes pride in maintaining particularly strong ties with former REU participants in order to evaluate the impact of the research experience on career choices .
Up-do-date information regarding the program , participants in prior years and their research projects , as well as an application form are available on the Web at www.cofc.edu/~grice/summer.htm or by contacting the Program Director , Dr. Louis E. Burnett , at ( 843 ) 953-9200 or burnettl @ cofc.edu.The Fort Johnson Undergraduate Summer Research Program provides a strong and unique undergraduate research experience that is generated from the direct involvement of scientists from five institutions using interdisciplinary approaches to address problems of mutual concern .
Student participants are exposed to the most recent and exciting questions and to the latest methodologies in marine biology .
Although primarily designed to encourage talented students to pursue careers in science , the program has broader impacts as well .
Participants learn to think critically , to take interdisciplinary approaches to problems and to communicate their ideas to others .
These are skills that benefit all citizens in a world that is made ever smaller and more complex by science and technology .
The primary goal of this project is to demonstrate the utility of a novel technology called 'massively parallel signature sequencing ' ( MPSS ) for the quantification of gene expression in plants .
MPSS is a rapid method to produce 17 base pair sequence tags that are precisely representative of the population of messenger RNAs in a given tissue .
Approximately eight libraries from diverse plant tissues will be sequenced by MPSS , generating ~500,000 tags per library , for a total of four million tags .
The 17-bp tag is derived from the 3 ' end of a messenger RNA or 'transcript ' and provides a virtually unique , experimentally derived identifier for each expressed gene .
The number of identical tags in a library for a given gene is precisely indicative of the level of expression of that gene .
The MPSS sequence data provide quantitative or 'digital ' expression information for the entire 'transcriptome ' , avoiding problems inherent in microarray analysis such as cross-hybridization , pre-selection of probe sequences and low signal .
Statistical methods for the analysis of quantitative expression data have demonstrated that these data are robust .
In comparison to the limited sets of data derived by the EST and SAGE techniques , these data will be the first large-scale quantitative expression data for plants in the public domain .
The MPSS sequence data is most informative when the tags are compared to either a completely sequenced genome or to large collections of ESTs .
To take full advantage of the MPSS technology , the initial libraries will be generated from the model plant Arabidopsis ( ecotype Columbia ) and the MPSS tags compared to the complete genomic sequence .
This comparison identifies the individual genes from which the tags are derived .
These data then will be used to quantify and experimentally confirm gene expression and mRNA transcripts in diverse wildtype and treated plant tissues ( including shoot , root , inflorescence , silique , anthers , callus ) ; estimate the frequency of alternative polyadenylation in plant tissues ; study co-regulated gene pairs and estimate promoter strength and tissue specificity ; assess global transcriptional changes in the disease resistance response .
Sequence tags generated through this project will be accessible via the web , and the interface will provide tools for data analyses .
These data also will be placed in public expression databases ( such as those at the National Center for Biotechnology Information , 'NCBI ' ) for comparison to microarray data , facilitating the expression analysis of either any single gene or all genes present in these libraries .
These experiments constitute a proof of concept for massively parallel signature sequencing in plants for the global analysis of gene expression.DeliverablesThe deliverables for this project are available electronically at < a href=http//www.dbi.udel.edu/mpss > http//www.dbi.udel.edu/mpss < /a > Principal Investigator Alexander KleshchevProposal Number DMS- 0244651Institution University of Oregon , EugeneTitle Groups and Representations conference AbstractThe subject of this meeting will be recent developments in the structure theory of simple algebraic and finite groups , their representation theory , and the interplay between these theories .
The meeting will cover three main , inter-related areas .
The first is the representation theory of simple algebraic groups in defining characteristic .
There is no known character formula for the irreducible modules , but some years ago , Lusztigproposed a conjectural formula , which has become the main focus of attention .
While Lusztig 's conjecture remains far from proved , attempts to prove it have led to spectacular progress in the area in recent years .
The second area is modular representation theory in non-defining characteristic .
Here one considers the finite groups of Lie type over a field of characteristic p , and studies representations over fields of characteristic different from p. One should also include in this area the representation theory of Coxeter groups ( such as the symmetric groups ) , which is intimately related to that of groups of Lie type .
Again there have been spectacular developments in recent years .
Fundamental conjectures have been formulated by Alperin , Dade and Broue , and while these are again nowhere near proved , many special cases have been solved , leading to a much deeper general understanding of this field .
The third area is the structure theory of simple algebraic and finite groups , particularly the subgroup structure , and its relationship with the representation theory discussed above .
Powerful parallel theories for subgroups of both the finite and the algebraic simple groups have been developed , using representation theory as one of the main tools , via the actions of classical groups on their natural modules , and of exceptional groups on their adjoint modules.The symmetry of any system , physical or mathematical , abstract or concrete , is encapsulated in its symmetry group .
Thus , the theory of groups finds many applications , both in mathematics and in the physical sciences .
Much of group theory is concerned with the study of the actions of groups on spaces of various kinds .
The study of group actions on vector spaces is known as representation theory , and that of group actions on sets as permutation group theory , and the focus for this meeting will be on these two areas and their applications .
The building blocks of all finite groups are the so-called simple groups , and most of these arise in a natural way from simple algebraic groups ( such as SL ( n , K ) , the group of n x n determinant 1 matrices over an algebraically closed field K ) .
Consequently , most attention is devoted to the representation and permutation group theory of these simple groups .
These areas are alive with basic conjectures , such as those of Lusztig , Alperin , Broue and Dade .
While these are all far from proved , attempts to prove them have led to spectacular progress in the subject in recent years .
The meeting will focus on this progress and its applications .
There is a healthy number of graduate students working in these areas , and one of the goals is to stimulate interaction between graduate students , young researchers and some of the established leaders in the field .
This award supports the Midwest Photosynthesis meeting on Photosynthesis Research in the Post Genomic World that will be held at the Turkey Run State Park , Marshall , IN from October 27-29 , 2002 .
The intent of this meeting has been to foster interaction and cooperation among laboratories in the midwest involved with photosynthesis research and to provide a forum for oral and poster presentations by graduate students and post-doctoral scholars .
In this regard , the annual meeting has been exquisitely successful and a large number of the students and post docs have gone on to successful scientific careers .
Many have continued research in photosynthesis and have established laboratories around the country .
Traditionally this meeting has emphasized biochemistry , biophysics , plant physiology and bioenergetics .
This support will allow development of a meeting around new technologies inherent in genomics and structural biology and new approaches in systems biology .
By bringing together photosynthetic researchers from around the country who are utilizing high throughput technologies and computational analyses for the study of photosynthesis or related topics , this forward looking meeting that will expose the participants to post-genomic systems biology .
This support will broaden the range of participants and provide travel and living expenses for undergraduate students and will enhance the diversity of the participants .
Stochastic programs involve time , probability and concurrency .
The classical research into reasoning about probabilistic models of concurrency provides methods to establish when two processes can be considered the same and be inter-substituted for each other .
Such equivalences are too exact since they are usually not robust under even slight perturbation of probabilities .
This is particularly unfortunate since practice dictates that probability numbers are to be viewed as numbers with some error estimate .
The focus of this proposal is approximations and approximate reasoning for stochastic concurrent systems .
The PI proposes to use metric based frameworks to formalize approximation schemes and develop compositional reasoning methods to study robust notions of ''approximately inter-substitutable '' programs .
The first intended application is the exploration of ''secure substitution '' in mobile code applications , where programs ( such as tax software ) are downloaded as needed , executed on a trusted host ( the home computer ) , require access to sensitive local data ( such as financial information ) and yet should not be permitted to leak information .
Probabilistic modeling is used in such applications to quantify the amount of information flow between systems .
A permissible secure substitution of one component for another in a program context has to preserve such information flow properties in addition to the usual observations .
The goal of this project is to define a robust notion of secure substitution , and develop compositional proof rules and algorithms to determine if a component can be securely substituted for another.The second intended application is the design and implementation of StochCC , an executable specification language for stochastic hybrid systems .
This research will build on the PI 's prior work into HybridCC , a declarative language for specifying and simulating hybrid systems .
Users of HybridCC ( in biological systems modeling ) have already found it useful to add limited forms of discrete probabilistic specification to HybridCC .
StochCC will perform a full and general integration of probabilities into HybridCC .
In order to come to computational grips with such systems , one needs a notion of discrete approximation .
Such discrete approximants play a role in both simulation ( executing the system within some error bound ) and approximate reasoning ( calculating the observations of the system within some error bound ) .
Symposium on dynamic failure and thin-film mechanicsThe California Institute of Technology requests funding for a symposiumon Dynamic Failure and Thin Film Mechanics , to be held January16th-18th , 2003 .
This symposium will assess the state-of-the-art inresearch issues in these fields and their impact on engineeringapplications .
The symposium will feature 25 invited speakers who areestablished and emerging leaders in Mechanics , Materials Science andEngineering , Mathematics , Applied Physics , Bioengineering , andGeomechanics and will include minorities and women from academia , industry and research laboratories .
Presentations will occur in 5-6sessions , none in parallel , to facilitate close interaction ofparticipants .
The meeting will culminate in a panel discussion tosummarize the state-of-the-art in the field and identify researchopportunities .
The presentations and discussion summaries will becollected in a bound volume of the Journal of the Mechanics and Physicsof Solids ( JMPS ) .
JMPS editors have also allocated 375 pages in thejournal for material from this symposium .
AbstractAward DMS-0244361Principal Investigator Peter J. KahnThe topology/geometry group in the Department of Mathematics atCornell University requests funding to continue support for threeyears for the Cornell Topology Festival , which this group hashosted each year since 1963 .
The Festival provides a significantarena for the dissemination and development of important , newresults from a wide array of areas within the realms ofalgebraic , differential , and geometric topology , and alliedsubjects .
While it is planned to continue the broad , interdisciplinary flavor and collaboration-friendly format thathave characterized the Festival over the years , it is alsoproposed to extend the Festival by a day to accommodate specificannual areas of emphasis .
In this way the Festival can beresponsive to the dominant trends of this era namely , thesimultaneous flourishing of both subspecializations andcross-disciplinary activity .
An active outreach program , whichincludes some travel support , will be initiated to broadenparticipation in the Festival .
For our initial conference underthis grant ( May 1-4 , 2003 ) , we will have as area of emphasis thevery active field of geometric group theory.The Topology Festival was conceived and initiated in the 1960'sboth as an annual celebration of the burgeoning field of topologyand as an annual conference/workshop for topologists in thenortheastern United States .
While topology has deep roots inearly European mathematical investigations of space and geometry , it is in the mid-twentieth century that topology came of age , with American mathematicians providing a large array of seminaldiscoveries .
American topology has been a key element inAmerica 's world leadership in mathematics .
Topology is a broadsubject , which overlaps with areas of `discrete ' mathematics ( e.g. , algebra , combinatorics ) , as well as with `continuous ' or`smooth ' mathematics ( e.g. , differential geometry , dynamicalsystems , mathematical physics ) .
Indeed , a large part ofcontemporary mathematics has been profoundly affected bytopological results and methods .
As a foundational subject , theapplications of topology are very widespread .
A few examples aregenetics ( the study of knotting of DNA molecules ) , neuroscienceand robotics ( dynamical systems modeling ) , computer science ( ingeometric modeling and simulation ) , mathematical economics ( insmooth equilibrium theory ) , physics ( the theory of gauge fields ) , and neighboring fields in mathematics ( e.g. , geometric grouptheory ) .
Although many of the basic questions that powered earlyefforts in topology have been answered , new problems areconstantly being generated as science moves forward , andimportant classical problems remain .
An example of the latter isthe Poincare Conjecture , which has been the subject of severalnotable talks at past Topology Festivals and remains one of thepremier unsolved problems of mathematics today -- -one of the ClayInstitute 's seven `millenium problems ' -- - and the focus ofintense research .
The topologists and geometers at Cornell areproud of the useful role that the Topology Festival has playedand will continue to play in the contemporary development of thisdynamic area of mathematics .
Not Available Professor Thomas Wenzel of Bates College is supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry program to continue work on combining macrocyclic hosts with lanthanide shift reagents to obtain chiral information about analytes using Nuclear Magnetic Resonance spectroscopy ( NMR ) .
Determination of the unique absolute configurations of certain chemical compounds is extremely important for pharmaceutical and other biochemical industries .
While NMR is not inherently sensitive to the handedness of molecules , it can be used in this analytical application in combination with macrocycles that provide environments enabling the exact three dimensional structures to be determined .
In this project , undergraduate students receive training in synthesis and NMR methods on an industrially relevant topic .
Not Available AbstractKaltonIn this proposal , the aim is to study a number of problemsrelated to Banach space theory and its applications .
Partof the project deals with the theory of extensions of oneBanach space by another .
For example it is planned to studythe problem of classifying those Banach spaces such thatevery minimal extension is trivial .
This problem can bereformulated as a problem in approximation theory .
It isalso planned to study applications to problems in thenonlinear theory of Banach spaces , related to problems ofexistence of uniform homeomorphisms between two Banachspaces or between their unit balls .
In a somewhat differentdirection the proposer plans to continue his ongoingresearch on Rademacher-bounded families of operators withapplications to sectorial operators and semigroups.The theory of extensions can be considered in the followingterms .
Suppose we are given a centrally symmetric solid inthree or more dimensions and we are allowed only to computeits cross-section by a slice in some directions and theshadow cast by the body in the perpendicular directions.This gives us some information about the solid , but does notpermit complete reconstruction .
The idea of studyingextensions is to obtain more complete information about thebody under certain additional conditions .
Many questions ofimportance in mathematical analysis and applications , although not formally expressed in this way , can bevisualized in terms of extensions .
Sectorial operators areof importance in the basic theory of partial differentialequations of evolution type ; such equations are veryimportant in physical applications .
Typically a sectorialoperator is a differential operator acting on some suitablespace of functions .
By understanding the properties ofsectorial operators and the semigroups they generate onegains a better understanding of the behavior of solutions ofcertain partial differential equations .
The Institute of Ecosystem Studies ( IES ) will provide undergraduate summer research opportunities through our Ecology in Context program through funding from the National Science Foundation ( NSF ) .
Each summer NSF provides support for 10 students who will carry out cutting-edge investigations of their own design , working closely with a mentor scientist .
The program emphasizes the community nature of the scientific enterprise .
As participants design and complete their independent research projects they consult with other scientists , present their plans for critique , and then speak in our annual Undergraduate Research Symposium and write a paper for a peer-reviewed IES Occasional Publication .
The program provides students many opportunities to reflect upon and think about the process of science and its place in the world .
Seminars and informal meetings provide for training in many facets of the research process .
Through a case study of a regional environmental issue , a career forum , and a day spent teaching high school students from a nearby city , students explore the social , political , intellectual and personal dimensions of being an ecologist .
The twelve-week program provides undergraduate students $ 3,600 stipend and free housing in an Institute dormitory .
Some assistance is also provided for travel to and from the program.For more information and to apply ( applications must be postmarked by 15 February 2003 ) Look at our website at www.ecostudies.org/education/reu/reu2.htmlOr contact Heather Dahl ( Undergraduate Research Program ) at ( 845 ) 677-9150 or dahlh @ ecostudies.org .
Nuclei with equal numbers of neutrons and protons near 72Kr provideinteresting and important tests of nuclear theory , as they can supply information onthe interaction of neutron-proton ( np ) pairs , and test our understanding of the evolutionof nuclear shape .
Recently , two possible consequences of np pairing have been offered adelay in the rotational frequency at which nucleon pairs break and align with theangular momentum of the core , and the apparent low level density of odd-odd N=Z nuclei.The primary focus of this work is the collection , analysis and interpretation of data onlow-spin states in the odd-odd nuclei 74Rb and 88Y , of which little or nothing is known .
Theexperiments will be carried out at Argonne National Laboratory ( ANL ) using theGammasphere array , an array of neutron detectors , and the Argonne Fragment Mass Analyzer ( FMA ) .
A secondary focus of this work is on studies of the nucleus 72Kr , including a low-spin experiment using the Gammasphere array coupled to the FMA .
The goal ofthis experiment is to observe and characterize the states at low excitationenergy and angular momentum , including the expected continuation of an oblate band thathas remained elusive through the years .
This work will be done with the support oftwo undergraduate research assistants who will have the opportunity to participate in thesetup of experiments , and the collection and analysis of the data .
The project focuses on integration of two learning paradigms for modeling stochastic visual patterns , and on developing a computational paradigm for effective stochastic inference .
The work will strengthen the move from descriptive to generative models .
Algorithms for learning and inference stronger than those existing today will be developed .
A few order of magnitude improvement is expected for the mew methods .
There is a good education program that includes improvement in the curriculum and design of new courses .
Strong collaboration with industry and governmental labs will provide students with interesting experience .
0244118 BuhrmanThis award funds a three-year Research Experience for Undergraduates ( REU ) Site at Cornell University at the Center for Nanoscale Systems in Information Technologies , an NSF Nanoscale Science and Engineering Center ( NSEC ) established in 2001 .
The program will support twelve students per year for research opportunities in nanotechnology .
The central emphasis of this program is on providing each participant with a stimulating research experience and an effective introduction to nanotechnology research .
The program is also designed to provide participants with new skills and resources to advance their research capabilities through short courses on topics that are not addressed in the standard undergraduate engineering and science curriculum .
These will include short workshops on technical writing and public speaking ; and short course lectures and hands-on experience with scanned probe instrumentation , metal machining , electronics , lithography , and pattern-transfer .
Students will be recruited from throughout the United States for an opportunity to ( 1 ) experience independent research ; ( 2 ) develop practical skills for research activities ; ( 3 ) gain in-depth perspective on opportunities in nanotechnology and in interdisciplinary science and engineering ; ( 4 ) become a part of the nanotechnology research community ; and ( 5 ) recognize that effective reporting and dissemination of results is an integral part of research .
The targeted undergraduate participants will be non-Cornell university students with a particular focus on students from institutions that are not major research institutions and students from population groups underrepresented in research fields in engineering in the United States .
0244030 GuoThis award funds a five-year Research Experience for Undergraduates ( REU ) Site at the Pennsylvania State University 's University Park Campus for 14 students each year for research in electrical engineering .
The REU site is designed as a nine-week summer experience .
Students will have an opportunity to participate in a broad range of research projects that include both traditional and emergent interdisciplinary fields of electrical and electronics engineering .
The program will introduce participants to hands-on , cutting-edge research experiences especially designed for undergraduate students .
Each student participant will be paired with a faculty mentor to work on a specific research topic .
In addition students will participate in a number of group activities such as weekly research seminars and biweekly field trips to world-renown research centers .
At the end of the summer program a mini research symposium will be held to give students an opportunity to share their experiences .
Students will be selected nationwide with an emphasis on junior-level students outside of the University Park Campus that desire research opportunities .
Current research collaborations with other universities will be used to assist in attracting students from population groups underrepresented in research fields in engineering .
This program seeks to broaden opportunities and enable participation of domestic undergraduate students in research careers in engineering .
The main objective of the proposed work is to investigate the following problem .
Let p be a prime .
Is the center , Cp , of the division ring of p x p generic matrices stably rational over the base field ?
This is an old problem which has been studied extensively over several decades , in particular for its connections to important problems in other fields , such as geometric invariant theory and Brauer groups .
If G is a finite group , and M is a ZG-lattice , then F ( M ) denotes the quotient field of the group algebra of the abelian group M written multiplicatively .
Procesi and Formanek have shown that Cn is isomorphic to the fixed field under the action of Sn of F ( M ) for a specific ZSn-lattice M. The findings of the investigator can be briefly described as two reduction steps .
Let p be a prime .
First , the investigator has shown that under certain conditions induction-restriction from Sp to the normalizer N , of a p-sylow subgroup H of Sp , does not affect the stable type of the field.. Second , the investigator has proved that if we twist the Sp-action by a 1-cocycle a in Ext1SP ( J ( A ) , L* ) , then Cp is stably isomorphic to La ( J ( A ) ) Sp , where A is the root lattice , L=F ( ZG/H ) and , J represents induction-restriction from Sp to H. Note that now we are inducing from H which is a cyclic group of order p. The cocycle a corresponds to an element of the relative Brauer group of L over LH .
The importance of this result lies in the connection , described by Saltman. , between fixed fields under twisted H-actions and corresponding fixed fields under twisted Sp-actions .
The above results naturally lead to the study of a-twisted actions on fields , and this is also an area the investigator will study ; more precisely actions induced from subgroups .
The investigator will be also working on Noether 's problem which is naturally related to the above question .
In particular the investigator will study its connections with monomial and a-twisted group actions and on fields.The focus of this project is to investigate the following problem .
Let p be a prime number .
Is the center of the division ring of p x p generic matrices stably rational over the base field ?
Generic matrices over a field F are n x n matrices whose entries are independent variables .
This problem has been studied extensively over several decades .
Its importance lies in part , in its connections to problems in many other fields such as , geometric invariant theory , representation theory of algebras , and Brauer groups .
Invariant theory and representation theory are classical mathematical fields whose results are also used in applied mathematics and physics .
Brauer groups are a fundamental structure in the study of central simple algebras .
The importance of this problem also lies in the fact that matrices , which are rectangular arrays of elements , are an essential tool for storing data .
Little is known about this problem .
Positive results have been proved for the primes 2 , 3,5 and 7 , the first of which was found in 1883 by Sylvester .
Despite more than 40 years of research , very little is known of the antiquity of the human presence on the Tibetan plateau , one of the world 's highest and most complex environments .
Although some archaeologists have argued for an early occupation , one that perhaps began 50,000 years ago , the only securely dated sites are 5,000 years old .
The recent discovery of the Chusang site in central Tibet near Lhasa may bring new insights to this problem .
First discovered in 1995 , but only recently published , the site is said to have human hand and footprints in a calcified mud deposit that dates to approximately 21,000 years ago .
Should this date be accurate , this site would radically change our thinking about the occupation of the plateau .
However , the site has never been examined in detail by archaeologists , and consequently , the scientific community is awaiting a more comprehensive study of the site before accepting these findings .
At the invitation of Chinese scholars , Dr. Mark Aldenderfer and a multidisciplinary team of American , Chinese , and Tibetan archaeologists , geologists , geomorphologists , and dating specialists will study Chusang and attempt to verify this early human presence .
Their work will involve a complete mapping of the site , a thorough review of its geological context with the goal of recovering new samples of datable materials in direct association with the hand and footprints , the examination of the region around the site to see if other traces of an early human presence can be located , and the preservation of the prints by making casts.The evaluation of the Chusang site and the confirmation of its antiquity will be of importance to more than just archaeology .
For much of the 20th century , geologists thought that the entire Tibetan plateau was covered with a thick sheet of ice throughout much of the glacial epoch .
Should Chusang date to 21,000 years ago , this finding would be of value to the growing body of scholars that believe the plateau was not covered with this ice sheet .
Another question that this project may help to provide insight into is the nature of human adaptations to high-elevation environments .
Physical anthropologists have remarked on the striking differences between Tibetans and Andean highlanders in the ways in which they have developed physiological responses to the rigors of life at high elevations .
Why this is the case is unknown , with some arguing that the difference is simply that indigenous Andean peoples have not lived at high elevation as long as have Tibetans , while others suggest that these differences are not time dependent , but instead reflect two distinct evolutionary pathways that solve the same problem .
Confirming the age of Chusang will help to evaluate these arguments.One major benefit of the project is that it will provide an ideal multi-national , multi-disciplinary learning environment for American , Chinese , and Tibetan graduate students .
As the first western archaeologist permitted to work on the central plateau , Dr. Aldenderfer believes that the project will encourage similar collaborative projects in Tibet .
ABSTRACTCHE-0244960Winograd/Pennsylvania StateThis research project , supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program , addresses fundamental aspects of the interaction of energetic ions and photons with solid surfaces .
The Principal Investigator and his group at the Pennsylvania State University are examining the interactions of cluster ion beams with organic thin films and with biological samples in an ice matrix .
A combination of state resolved experimental measurement with classical trajectory calculational modeling , provides information about the deposition of energy in the solid surface upon ion-surface collision .
Molecule-specific imaging of the sample surface is the goal of this work .
Results from these studies will impact analytical mass spectrometry , fusion reactor design , biotechnology , and reactive ion etching of electronic materials .
Surface analysis using high energy atomic and cluster ion beams is the focus of the research supported in this project .
With the funding of the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program , Professor Winograd and his coworkers are examining the fundamental aspects of ion-solid surface interactions .
The particular focus of this work is on the interaction of energetic cluster ions with biological samples in an ice matrix , with the goal of developing molecule specific surface analysis of biological materials .
Title A Unified Approach to Analyze Vibration of Rotating Flexible StructuresRotating machines appear everywhere in our daily life .
They could range from high-techapplications ( e.g. , jet engines ) to ordinary household appliances ( e.g. , washing machines ) .
Forthe past decade , rapid technology advances in various industries call for more accurate vibrationanalysis for rotating machines .
For example , high-speed , high-density hard disk drives ( HDD ) require accurate geometric design of rotors and housings to meet stringent vibration specs.The purpose of this project is to develop a unified approach to analyze vibration of rotatingmachines with arbitrary geometry , complexity , and axisymmetry of the rotors and the stators.The proposed research consists of three parts .
The first part is mathematical development of theunified approach integrating finite element analysis and gyroscopic effects .
The second part is toverify the unified formulation experimentally for axisymmetric and asymmetric rotors .
The thirdpart is to extend the unified formulation to systems that employ multiple rotating components , such as multi-stage turbines and network storage devices hosting dozens of HDD.This research is novel and revolutionary , because it applies to rotating machines witharbitrary geometry and complexity .
For the society , this research will help many industriesproduce faster and quieter rotating machines with higher reliability and efficiency .
Also , thisresearch will enhance education through an informal intern program , an effective technologytransfer through industrial short courses , active participation of underrepresented students , andimproved research infrastructure ( e.g. , disclosure of software tools , patents , and test facilities ) .
Institution Auburn UniversityProposal Number EIA - 0243862PI Saad BiazTitle Collaborative Proposal REU Site for Pervasive and Mobile ComputingCollaboratorInstitution University of Alabama - TuscaloosaProposal Number EIA - 0244156PI Joel JonesThis project supports a collaborative effort of two Computer Science departments in two universities to establish an REU site in Pervasive and Mobile Computing .
The collaboration supports 16 undergraduate students per year at the two campuses who would not be otherwise exposed to research .
This Site builds on complementary expertise of the two institutions and on existing collaborative research projects in pervasive and mobile computing .
One university contributes expertise in wireless systems and in minority student education , and the other will contributes expertise in emergency reporting .
The multi-university pervasive and mobile computing project is developing a system architecture for integrating information appliances such as PDA 's and 3G mobile phones into first-responders ' operations in emergency situations .
The goal of the research in which the undergraduates participate is to define not a particular system but a framework for public-sector mobile data systems based on empirical data derived from ongoing development of such systems .
PI Takis Souganidis , University of Texas , AustinDMS-0244787ABSTRACTThe PI proposes to continue his program to develop methods to study nonlinear , parabolic/elliptic and hyperbolic , deterministic and stochastic partial differential equations ( pde ) arising as models in areas like continuum and statistical physics , biology , ecology , engineering , etc .
The emphasis of this proposal is on the development of ( rigorous ) theories for ( i ) weak ( stochastic viscosity ) solutions of fully nonlinear , ( degenerate ) parabolic stochastic partial differential equations , and ( ii ) homogenization ( averaging ) of nonlinear , parabolic/elliptic and hyperbolic partial differential equations in spatio-temporal randomly heterogeneous media .
The randomness is typically associated with singular dependence on the state variables and lack of compactness .
Overcoming both issues requires the development of new methods and tools.Nonlinear stochastic pde are very often used to model complex phenomena , like turbulent combustion , nucleations , phase transitions at low temperature , etc. , It is therefore self-evident that there is a pressing need for the development of a mathematical theory for such equations .
The theory of stochastic viscosity solutions , which is been developed by the PI and Lions , is of fundamental importance , since it allows for the study of a completely new and , at the same time , very rich class of nonlinear stochastic pde arising in many of the aforementioned contexts .
As this theory becomes more available , known and developed , it is expected that it will play an important role also in applications , since it will provide the necessary tools to analyze previously intractable models.The mathematical modeling of phenomena with many scales at the microscopic level , like turbulence , front propagation in phase transitions , spatial ecology , polymer growth , composite and perforated materials in mechanics , often necessitates the use of random pde with oscillating random parameters .
At the macroscopic level these parameters average out and the phenomena are then described by an averaged ( homogenized ) equation .
This leads naturally to questions of homogenization of nonlinear pde in spatio-temporal stationary ergodic settings , which , roughly speaking , are the most general settings where self-averaging is to be expected .
Not Available Abstract The principal investigators will work on two fundamentalprojects in the field of geometric analysis .
The firstproject concerns the interrelated analytic study ofrational billiards , moduli spaces of abeliandifferentials , and the dynamics of the Teichmullergeodesic flow .
A recent theme has been the interplaybetween the dynamics on flows on homogeneous spaces on theone hand , and the dynamics of flows on rational billiardsand flat surfaces on the other .
This synergy has led torecent breakthroughs in both subjects .
Broadly speaking , theprincipal investigators propose to apply the methods andideas developed in the case of homogeneous spaces to studyrational billiards and dynamics on Teichmuller space .
The second project is to give a combinatorial approachto the study of Teichmuller Space and its geometry .
Oneof the major goals is to develop a complete analoguebetween this theory and the classical theory of thegeometry of the modular curve.Many natural phenomena are studied via the branch ofmathematics known as dynamical systems .
One importantexample is planetary motion .
Another centuries old exampleis the theory of billiards , or the study of collisions ofmolecules .
Triangular billiards occur in the study ofelastic collisions of two masses in an interval .
Thestudy of a dynamical system can take many forms .
Oneexample is to study periodic orbits ( or repeatingbehavior ) ; another is to study choatic behavior.The principal investigators plan to study a variety ofdynamical systems that occur in mathematics .
One of theprominent topics will be billiards in polygons in theplane , and a generalization known as flat surfaces .
These surfaces also fit together into a family known as amoduli space , and the principal investigators plan tostudy dynamics on moduli spaces .
A major component of theproject will be educational .
The principal investigatorsplan to give workshops for students , both at theundergraduate and graduate levels , in order to introducethem to these fields of mathematics .
This project contains two components ( 1 ) The astrophysical research focuses on a program to produce approximate gravitational waveforms to provide useful information to ongoing gravitational wave detection experiments on a faster time scale than that likely to be needed for an accurate numerical simulation .
In their last few orbits of inspiral , and in their final plungeand merger , these binaries strongly curve spacetime and strongly emit gravitational waves .
A complete understanding of this process , and of the gravitational waveforms produced , will require much further development of supercomputer evolution codes .
The approach here is to use an approximation scheme for the gradual late-stage binary inspiral followed by supercomputer evolution for the final inward plunge and merger of the holes .
The method exploits the fact that the spacetime of the gradual inspiral differs very little from that of a perfectly periodic binary .
This gradual inspiral is therefore approximated by an exactly periodic orbit .
These periodic orbits can be used to construct a quasiequilibrium sequence representing the gradual pre-plunge decrease in radius of the binary , and to give a good approximation to the corresponding gravitational waveform .
( 2 ) An outstanding problem in theoretical physics is how to reconcile the principles of quantum theory with those of general relativity .
In general relativity , spacetime does not have any fixed structure which is not dynamical but governs dynamics from outside as an unmoved mover .
On the other hand , quantum theory depends on such structures .
This project views Einstein 's theory as a model on which one can clarify how to quantize a system with no external structure without introducing an external structure .
The first main theme here is that foliations can be viewed not as fixed elements but as free variables which help us to build phase space from spacetime foliation .
The second main theme is more specific .
A black hole is formed by a spherical collapse of quantum matter that produces quantum geometry without its own degrees of freedom will be studied .
A mean geometry and its fluctuations will be determined , and a study will be made of how the radiation produced on this background differs from the thermal radiation fields .
At present , relativistic gravitation is of crucial interest both at the frontier of astrophysicsand at the frontier of theoretical physics .
This project contains research of both types .
In addition to its broad impacts on the two frontiers of gravitational physics , this project will also provide broad theoretical training to postdoctoral researchers and students .
Workers are more likely to find that social sexual misconduct constitutes sexual harassment when the law encourages them to take the perspective of the complainant , ( i.e. , apply the reasonable woman as opposed to the reasonable person standard ) .
To explain these findings , we developed a two-stage processing model in which workers reach a preliminary harassment judgment based upon well-rehearsed and easily retrievable attitude structures , such as hostile and benevolent sexism .
In two studies full-time workers will view videotapes depicting action sequences in two influential sexual harassment cases .
The first study manipulates legal standard ( reasonable person vs. reasonable woman ) and the complainant 's initial behavior .
Study 2 uses a similar paradigm but imposes the reasonable person standard on all participants .
However , half the participants will expect a scrutinizing interview following the videotapes .
We predict that those who do not expect an interview will react to their own hostile and/or benevolent sexist attitudes triggered by the complainant 's conduct .
However , those who anticipate an interview in which they must explain their judgments will correct their initial biases and examine the action sequence from an impartial point of view .
A successful test of these hypotheses would suggest that in reasonable woman jurisdictions , organizations can sensitize workers by training them on the subtleties of the law , that is the difference between the reasonable woman and person 's perspectives .
In reasonable person jurisdictions , organizations could routinely interview all workers involved in or reporting suspicious conduct .
Intellectual merit As an explanation for the maintenance of tropical tree diversity , Janzen ( 1970 ) and Connell ( 1971 ) proposed that natural enemies reduce seedling recruitment in the vicinity of conspecific adults and/or at high conspecific seedling density while allowing for heterospecific recruitment to occur .
Numerous studies have documented mortality patterns consistent with the Janzen-Connell ( J-C ) hypothesis , without identifying particular causes .
Soil fungal pathogens are likely causal factors of density- and distance-dependent mortality because of strong host specialization , short generation times , long persistence in soil as spores , and high fecundity .
Furthermore , the potential importance of disease in structuring plant communities is only now becoming more widely appreciated .
The proposed experiments , with a focus on soil fungal pathogens as the mortality agent , will test fundamental assumptions of J-C , including 1 ) if host-specific soil-borne fungal pathogens cause distance and density-dependent mortality in seedlings in both temperate and tropical systems ; 2 ) the effects of light availability in mediating pathogen effects through compensation in growth and/or more rapid lignification ; 3 ) differential pathogen sensitivity among species varying in shade tolerance ; 4 ) differential pathogen sensitivity among species varying in local abundance , with the possibility that pathogens keep common species in check and promote diversity or alternatively that rare species arekept rare because they are more susceptible to pathogens ; 5 ) differential pathogen sensitivity between tropical and temperate species.Broader impacts The proposed research is highly relevant to managing conservation reserves if diseases play a role in the population dynamics of their hosts and the structure and diversity of communities that they inhabit .
Also , without adequate knowledge of plant-soil pathogen interactions in 'natural ' systems it is more difficult to combat the spread of exotic , invasive pathogens .
The research enhances participation of underrepresented groups in science ( a female doctoral candidate and a minority female student intern ) , provides opportunities for undergraduate internships in Costa Rica and employment in Michigan , and provides training to Costa Rican field assistants .
Among the diversity of reproductive types in plants and animals , one permutation - androdioecy ( mixtures of males and hermaphrodites ) - is distinguished by its rarity , being found in only 18 cases .
Two of these 18 species are found in the primitive crustacean class Branchiopoda , but another 20 branchiopod species ( in the genus Eulimnadia ) have sex ratios suggestive of androdioecy .
If these 20+ closely-related species are truly androdioecious , then this rare mating system would likely have been present in the ancestor to this lineage , placing the origin of androdioecy at ~280 million years ago .
This inferred age is orders of magnitude older than expected by theory .
We propose to combine three parallel projects ( laboratory rearing experiments , morphological comparisons , and DNA sequencing ) to assess whether androdioecy is an ancestral or derived trait in these crustaceans .
The rearing experiments will be used to determine the extent of androdioecy in these species .
The morphological and DNA projects will produce data used to estimate the relationships among species within these crustaceans .
We will measure 30 morphological characters per species as well as sequence four DNA regions , which should enable a robust estimate of evolutionary relationships among these animals .
We will then use these estimates to determine whether androdioecy is an ancestral condition for these crustaceans , which if true , suggests that this reproductive mode may have persisted for hundreds of millions of years , casting doubt on the notion that androdioecy is a transitory reproductive system .
This research project will accomplish two scientific and three educational goals .
First , these data will allow us to better understand the factors that maintain males with hermaphrodites in androdioecious species , which can shed light on the importance of mating between individuals relative to self-fertilization .
Such an understanding can help us to formulate better management practices for both domesticated plants and animals as well better preservation plans for endangered species .
Second , delineating the true relationship among the species within this crustacean group will be helpful for determining the true number of species in North America , which can be used to shed light on which of these species may be threatened or endangered in the United States .
For the educational components of this research , this project will integrate teaching and primary research on three levels .
First , funding will directly support two graduate students and one undergraduate student for three years .
Second , all three PI 's will encourage undergraduate students to participate in research via independent research projects and honors thesis research .
Third , part of this research program will be incorporated into two on-going educational programs at The University of Akron ( a ) an NSF-funded program that brings basic research into the laboratories of the Introductory Biology course at U of A , and ( b ) a 5-year , privately funded program that involves minority high school students in basic research at U of A via a mentoring program , involving both undergraduate and graduate students in a research team .
In all research mentoring programs , priority will be given to qualified minority and women candidates at all levels of participation .
Neuropeptide Modulation of a Vocal Motor PathwaySunny K. Boyd , Principal InvestigatorProposal Number 0235903The long-term objective of this research program is to identify the interactions among chemical messengers that control behaviors .
Peptide and steroid hormones regulate social behaviors in representative species from all vertebrate classes .
The mechanisms of action of these compounds and the site in the brain where they act on specific behaviors are poorly understood .
The interaction of testicular steroids and the neuropeptide arginine vasotocin will be investigated in the vertebrate brainstem .
Three experimental approaches will be used to assess the importance of these interactions in generation of vocalizations , which are a critical component of social behavior in many species .
First , neuropeptide effects on the brainstem will be tested by analyzing vocalizations prior to , and following , neuropeptide administration .
Second , whether the necessary anatomical conditions are met at a cellular level will be determined with tract-tracing and peptide or receptor double-labeling .
Third , this project will determine whether peptide receptors in the brainstem are functional with receptor binding and electrophysiological recording techniques .
Neuropeptides alter a variety of vertebrate behaviors , including parental , aggressive , and reproductive behaviors .
However , little is known about the effects of these peptides at the motor output level .
Findings from this research program will thus offer insight into conserved mechanisms for peptide control of behavior .
These studies will provide excellent training for undergraduate and graduate students who will acquire skills at the organismal , tissue , cellular , and molecular levels .
These projects will also train high school science teachers and minority undergraduates via two institutional programs .
L. Michael RomeroPhysiology of Stress in Wild AnimalsProposal Number 0235044 All organisms are faced with noxious stimuli from the environment ( such as predators or storms ) .
Vertebrates activate a suite of physiological mechanisms to protect themselves from these stimuli , collectively called the stress response .
A vital part of the stress response is the release of the glucocorticoid steroid hormones , but even after more than 60 years of studying stress we still have only a rudimentary idea of how glucocorticoids help wild animals survive .
Earlier work indicated that several free-living bird species seasonally regulate glucocorticoid release by varying concentrations of the hormone throughout the year .
This proposal builds upon these results to ask the following questions why do animals seasonally regulate glucocorticoid levels ; is there a physiological consequence ; and does it affect their susceptibility to chronic stress ?
Answering these questions will require an integrated approach of both laboratory and field studies , such as the one proposed here .
We will capture wild free-living house sparrows ( Passer domesticus ) and test how glucocorticoids help regulate blood glucose and triglyceride levels at different times of the year .
We anticipate that glucose and triglyceride regulation will depend upon seasonal changes in glucocorticoid levels .
We will also bring house sparrows into the laboratory to test whether physiological responses to chronic stress vary seasonally .
We anticipate that the magnitude of the negative consequences of chronic stress will depend upon the time of year .
These results will help define the physiological consequences of seasonal glucocorticoid release during stress in wild animals , thus having a far-reaching impact on our basic knowledge of the ecological validity of stress responses.This research will also provide important training for students .
Both graduate and undergraduate students will be exposed to , and learn , many important research skills in both the laboratory and field .
These findings will be valuable to researchers in diverse fields including Conservation Biology , Endocrinology , and Population Biology , just to mention a few .
Protein translocation across membrane barriers is an important process in all organisms , both prokaryotic and eukaryotic .
Protein translocation is critical to a variety of cellular functions , including protein secretion , biogenesis of organelles , compartmentalization , and cell signalling .
Since about half of the proteins synthesized in a cell must cross at least one membrane before reaching their final destinations , protein translocation across membranes is a fundamental cellular process .
The process by which precursor proteins are imported into the mitochondrion , a double-membraned organelle , is not only important in its own right , but it also serves as a model system for studying this ubiquitous process .
There are complex sets of proteins in both the inner and outer membranes of mitochondria that recognize , sort and selectively translocate precursor proteins across each respective membrane to their final destinations .
The outer membrane import machinery is called the Tom ( translocation , outer membrane ) complex and the inner membrane machinery is called the Tim ( translocation , inner membrane ) complex .
Components of the complexes are designated Tim or Tom followed by their molecular weight .
Integral membrane proteins are imported by the Tim22 complex .
Water-filled channels are purported to play key roles in this process in both the inner and outer membranes , and these channels are named TIM and TOM , respectively .
A major goal of this project is to define the mechanism of action and regulation of these mitochondrial channels during protein import , using yeast mitochondria .
The findings should be applicable to this process in other cell membranes and higher eukaryotes .
The protein import channels of the native mitochondrial inner and outer membranes will be studied by using a technique called patch-clamping in which electrophysiological measurements are made across single channels in a small patch of membrane .
Mitochondria and mitoplasts ( mitochondria stripped of their outer membrane by French pressing ) from various genetically manipulated strains of yeast will be subjected to direct patch-clamping .
The electrophysiological channel activities will be recorded and compared with those of mitochondrial channels reconstituted in proteoliposomes using recombinant Tim proteins thought to play a major role in protein translocation .
The single channel behavior and peptide sensitivity of specific recombinant Tim proteins ( e.g. , 23 , 17 and 50 ) will be compared with TIM found in mitoplasts and proteoliposomes .
The the single channel properties of TOM will also be studied , including its regulation by targeting peptides and architecture of the Tom complex .
The channel activity of recombinant Tim22 will be compared with that found in the mitoplast , after establishing channel activation protocols .
The mechanism of protein translocation through TIM and TOM will be further examined by patch-clamping genetically manipulated mitochondria and mitoplasts during actual protein import .
The architecture of the complexes and the effects of preprotein folding on import will be addressed using mutants and model proteins .
As head of the only lab in the U.S. with the expertise to routinely apply these techniques to native and reconstituted mitochondrial membranes , Dr. Kinnally is in a unique position to undertake these investigations of the mechanisms of protein import in mitochondria.While these experiments will enable studies of the mechanism ( s ) and the role of channels in protein translocation in mitochondria , it is likely that the same principles are followed in all biological membranes .
Therefore , understanding mitochondrial sorting and protein translocation can facilitate understanding of , for example , the same process in the prokaryotes , endoplasmic reticulum and chloroplasts .
The results from this project will be published to increase the information base of a fundamental cellular process , i.e. , protein translocation across membranes .
This information is a resource for research in this and other areas , as well as education .
The PI is keenly interested in development of human resources in science .
Many graduate , undergraduate , and high school students , postdoctorals , senior scientists and teachers have visited and/or trained in this laboratory ( this training has the added benefit of serving as a further mechanism for dissemination of both scientific results and the techniques uniquely employed in the laboratory ) .
0235339BohsThis project will examine evolutionary relationships among the so-called spiny Solanums , a group of about 450 species of plants in the Solanaceae ( tomato or potato family ) .
Included within this group are economically important fruit crops such as the eggplant ( Solanum melongena ) , the lulo or naranjilla ( S. quitoense ) , and the cocona ( S. sessiliflorum ) as well as species with potential as sources of glycoalkaloids useful in medicine .
The spiny Solanums exhibit much variation in their morphology and reproductive biology and show intriguing biogeographical patterns through the tropics .
Despite their potential as economic crops and their use as model systems for the study of biological questions , the taxonomy and phylogeny of the spiny Solanums have been neglected.The primary data for the phylogenetic analyses will come from DNA sequencing of three genes or gene regions , with measures of mutational differences used to define major lineages within the spiny Solanum group .
Sequences will be obtained from the nuclear ribosomal and waxy genes and from chloroplast gene regions , from exemplar species samples representing as much of the taxonomic diversity of the group as possible .
These data sets will be analyzed separately and in combination to achieve an overall view of evolutionary relationships within the spiny Solanums .
Collecting trips to Mexico and Ecuador are planned to gather material for morphological and molecular analyses , in collaboration with local botanists .
More detailed sampling will taxa place in two focal groups , the S. mammosum and S. quitoense groups , in order to clarify relationships at the species level and examine evolutionary patterns of floral biology , biogeography , and fruit chemistry and morphology.This project will contribute to teaching and learning by employing post-doctoral associates and undergraduate students who will be trained in taxonomy , molecular methods , and data analysis .
Substantial national and international collaboration will result through foreign collecting and herbarium trips and interaction with Solanaceae specialists in the U.S. and abroad .
This project will generate extensive DNA sequence data as well as herbarium collections , leaf and DNA samples , and germplasm accessions that will be distributed to international repositories and available for wide dissemination .
The scientific information gathered as part of this project is expected to impact humankind by increasing the agronomic potential of important or emerging crop species such as the eggplant , lulo , and cocona and by contributing to conservation of germplasm of economically useful plants .
This project develop undergraduate engineering pathways which include the visual and performing arts .
For students with definite talents in both engineering and the visual & performing arts ( V & PAs ) , an environment will be created that is supportive of the development of both areas will definitely enhance the educational process and student academic performance of the engineering component.Furthermore , engineering students will benefit from participation in the V & PAs terms of two areas 1 ) development of creativity-related skills ( beyond that typically achieved by traditional engineering students ) ; and 2 ) stress management.Perception of engineering as a possible academic major will be enhanced by the offering of such a dual program , leading to additional engineering student recruitment.A web site and flyer will be created that contains a ) Why students should care about the V & PAs ; b ) opportunities for engineering students in the V & PAs ; and 3 ) examples of student it success stories .
The impact of these on middle and high school students and teachers will be explored .
The potential impact of such a program on middle and high school students and teachers attitudes towards engineering will be investigated.Undergraduate Certificates will be created in the following V & PA areas dance , theater , music , and art.. David Micha is supported by the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to develop a theory of the quantum dynamics of the many-atom systems by combining density matrix and time-dependent many-electron treatments .
Research outcomes will provide atomic models , and generate electronic potential energies , couplings , and electric transition dipoles as needed for molecular spectra and dynamics .
A related research objective is to describe the femtosecond dynamics and spectra of electronic rearrangement induced by collisions or by light absorption , particularly for systems with an alkali atom and either a few or many noble gas atoms .
This effort involves atomic orbital changes , multiplet and fine structure of atomic transitions , and similar transitions for molecular electronic states .
The knowledge and computer software developed in this project will be applicable to phenomena in photochemistry and photobiology that are relevant to societal concerns about the environment and medicine , as well as energy production using solar radiation .
Minority graduate education will be actively advanced in this project .
Micha will also continue to coorganize Pan American workshops that involve a significant fraction of Hispanic participants .
0235919DuffAs one of the oldest living assemblages of terrestrial organisms , the hornworts are crucial to understanding the survival and diversification of early plants on land .
With a worldwide distribution of approximately 150 species , the hornworts are tiny , inconspicuous plants that are poorly known , even by botanists .
These plants exhibit unique and innovative means of coping with their existence on land , including positioning all vulnerable organs in mucilage-filled cavities that are nested within vegetative tissue .
Intriguing features of the cell include a solitary chloroplast ( photosynthetic organelle ) that has an architecture reminiscent of algal cells .
Detailed examination of such features will clarify more fully the changes that occurred when algae made the transition from water to land and ultimately gave rise to land plants .
Despite their evolutionary importance and peculiar features , hornworts are among the few major groups of plants for which a comprehensive scientific study has yet to be conducted .
This first examination of hornworts will provide a portrait of the phylogeny and biodiversity of the group from a global perspective .
Information on genetic and structural diversity will be accumulated for hornworts collected from multiple geographic regions by an international assemblage of experts on these plants , headed by Dr. Robert Duff at University of Akron and Dr. Karen Renzaglia at Southern Illinois University .
The goals are to 1 ) establish a robust phylogeny of hornworts by generating and analyzing multiple data sets ; 2 ) produce a revised classification based on the relationships established by the phylogenetic analyses ; and 3 ) reconstruct global patterns of hornwort diversification and especially among the Australasian landmasses .
The program will greatly expand knowledge of this widespread but relatively obscure group of evolutionarily significant plants , and will also explore more global issues relating to biological diversification and biocomplexity .
This project will have an impact on the infrastructure of education within the principal investigators ' institutions , communities and beyond .
Both PIs have demonstrated a strong commitment to providing enriching and supportive educational experiences for elementary , high school , undergraduate and graduate students .
Students involved in the project will experience a wide range of professional activities and will be involved in all aspects of the research enterprise .
Emphasis will be placed on attracting and mentoring students from underrepresented groups .
The international component of this proposed program will provide the resources and opportunities for students to explore collaboration with students and scientists from a diversity of cultures and backgrounds .
By the dissemination of data through presentations , publications and a Web site dedicated to the program , awareness of hornwort biology will be extended to the international scientific community as well as the general public .
The results of this study will be valuable for informing decisions on conservation and environmental management as the habitats of these tiny ancient plants become increasingly threatened .
ABSTRACT Nitrogen ( N ) availability often limits plant growth in forestry and agriculture , while excess N in atmospheric deposition increasingly harms forests throughout the US .
Mycorrhizal fungi are key plant symbionts and directly influence plant growth and N cycling through the uptake , retention , and transfer of soil-derived N. At present , mycorrhizal symbioses are poorly understood .
Consequently , they are largely absent from conceptual pictures of forest functioning and ecosystem models used to predict forest growth and stress responses .
Foliar 15N14N ratios appear useful markers of carbon and N allocation in the symbiosis , but we have limited understanding of biochemical mechanisms regulating 15N14N distributions .
We will measure complete carbon and N isotope budgets in mycorrhizal Pinus sylvestris seedlings supplied with different N forms , at different N availabilities , and with different fungal symbionts .
Photosynthesis , belowground respiration , and aboveground respiration will also be quantified .
We will also investigate the underlying biochemical mechanisms causing 15N14N patterns using data from mass spectrometry and nuclear magnetic resonance measurements .
From these experiments in culture , we will be poised to ( 1 ) measure carbon allocation to mycorrhizal fungi in ecosystems under different environmental conditions , ( 2 ) use foliar 15N14N measurements to indicate allocation to mycorrhizal fungi , and ( 3 ) explicitly incorporate mycorrhizal fungi into ecosystem-level models .
BROADER IMPACTS This work will improve understanding of what regulates forest productivity and the functioning of mycorrhizal symbioses under anthropogenic N deposition .
There will be at least 3 graduate students trained on this grant .
The Role of Ornamentation Versus GeneticCompatibility in Passerine Bird Mate ChoicePIs Dr. Geoffrey E. Hill and Dr. Herman MaysHow do female animals choose mates ?
It has long been known that female animals the use expression of ornamental traits , such as bright coloration , as the basis for choosing mates .
Indeed there is growing evidence that such ornamental traits evolved as indicators of mate quality .
A new theory in behavioral biology suggests that animals may also choose mates based on genetic compatibility .
Recent studies indicate that genetic diversity is linked to important aspects of individual fitness , such as the ability to fight disease .
There may , therefore , be an advantage for females to choose males within a population whose genetic makeup is most dissimilar to hers , thereby producing offspring that are genetically diverse and healthy .
Whether females use the expression of ornamental traits , genetic complimentarity , or both in their choice of mates is the focus of this study of Eastern Bluebirds , a species with bright blue plumage coloration that is used by females in mate choice .
New genetic techniques will be used to determine the genetic compatibility of pairs of bluebirds .
The health of offspring from pairs that are more or less similar in genetic makeup will then be measured .
Mate choice experiments will also be conducted in which females are allowed to choose between potential mates who are either genetically similar or brightly colored .
Throughout this project high school , undergrad , and grad students will be involved in research .
ABSTRACT Positive feedback has been proposed as a mechanism that results in thestable persistence of alternative states of an ecosystem .
Such feedbackmay operate through plant-induced alterations in soil microbialcommunities , which in turn alter plant communities through changes innutrient dynamics .
The recent replacement of native understory plantcommunities in eastern deciduous forests by apparently stable communitiesof exotic species provides an excellent model system in which to test thepresence of soil-mediated positive feedbacks .
Previous studies of thissystem have shown that the recent shift in community composition is relatedto changes in both nutrient cycling processes and microbial communitycomposition .
I propose greenhouse microcosm and field plot experiments totest whether plants drive changes in soil-based ecosystem processes byaltering the soil microbiota , and whether these changes in turn promote thedominance of the exotics .
The proposed studies will explicitly contrast alitter-driven above-ground mechanism with a root-driven below-groundmechanism .
BROADER IMPACTS If the hypothesis of plant-soil positive feedback created byaltered nutrient cycling is supported , it would both demonstrate aplausible mechanism for the persistence of alternative stable communitiesand help explain the establishment of dominance by some exotic plantspecies .
In addition , this project will train at least 1 graduate student and 3 undergraduates .
Division of one cell into two is one of the key critical functions of life .
It is essential that cell division be precisely regulated , both spatially and temporally , in order to ensure appropriate distribution of subcellular components such as organelles and chromosomes to the daughter cells .
Cell division is not always necessarily symmetrical ; numerous examples of assymetrical division can be found among fungi , plants and animals , and these are often essential for differentiation and organismal morphogenesis .
A great deal has been learned about fungal cell division ( also termed cytokinesis or septation ) from studies of various yeasts and filamentous fungi .
In such fungi , septation is regulated by signal transduction pathways such as the septation initiation network ( SIN ) in fission yeast .
SIN includes a MAP- kinase-like kinase cascade , and activation of this cascade initiates septation .
The consequence of activation of the SIN network is to activate as-yet-unidentified components at the contractile medial ring , composed mainly of actin microfilaments and myosin plus various other proteins including actin-binding proteins .
The ultimate function of this ring is to initiate the assembly of the septum , composed of long chain polysaccharides ( beta-glucan and chitin ) , at the right place .
While all SIN molecules localize to the spindle pole body in yeast , the terminal Sid2p kinase and its associated Mob1p partially translocate to the septation site to activate septation .
This project addresses the question of how these SIN molecules ( Sid2p and Mob1p ) travel from the spindle pole body to the septation site .
It is proposed that microtubules play essential roles in the localization of SIN molecules .
This hypothesis will be tested in the filamentous fungus , Aspergillus nidulans .
A. nidulans is a particularly good model organism for these studies because there exists a substantial armamentarium of experimental tools , and completion of the full sequence of its genome is anticipated shortly .
In A. nidulans , the AnMOB1 protein localizes not only to the spindle pole body and the septation site , but also to the central spindle .
The localization is dependent on microtubules .
Cytoplamic dynein , a microtubule motor associated with the spindle during cell division , has been demonstrated to play a role in septum positioning .
Dynein mutants will be used to test whether AnMOB1 localization is dependent on cytoplasmic dynein .
Experiments will also be performed to test whether spindle pole body localization of AnMOB1 is dependent on minus end-directed kinesin KLPA .
The roles of the plus end-directed kinesin BIMC in AnMOB1 localization to the central spindle will be explored .
In addition , pharmacological and genetic approaches will be used to test whether microtubule dynamics plays a role in AnMOB1 localization .
These studies will provide insights into the roles played by microtubule dynamics , microtubule motors , and the microtubule-organizing center in the intracellular movement of SIN molecules , and ultimately in cytokinesis.Broader Impacts Aspergillus nidulans is not only a valuable research model , but it is also useful as teaching material for undergraduate and high school students .
Dr. Liu uses living Aspergillus to demonstrate cell biological phenomena ( cell division , organelle movement , and microtubule dynamics ) to local Junior High School students and home-schooled students who visit his laboratory .
He also uses Aspergillus as a teaching model in an undergraduate Introductory Biology course and in a graduate level course , Common Approaches in Plant Cell and Molecular Biology .
Dr. Liu has also mentored several undergraduates who have performed research in his laboratory ; these students have gone on to graduate school or to careers in biotechnology research .
This project provides partial funding for the 2003 Gordon Research Conference on RNA Editing , to be held January 19-24 at the Holiday Inn in Ventura , California .
This meeting has occurred in alternate years since 1997 and is the only existing meeting devoted exclusively to the field of RNA editing .
The meeting serves as the venue where researchers present important and exciting breakthroughs in the field , and recent meetings have featured reports ranging from the development of the first in vitro systems for studying RNA editing in plant organelles , to the first demonstration that RNA editing is crucial for proper neuronal function in mice , flies , and worms .
Because the meeting is the only regularly scheduled meeting in the field , it is the primary means by which young researchers are exposed to other scientists in the field .
Typically , about 40 % of the attendees at the RNA Editing GRC are postdoctoral trainees and graduate students .
As is typical of Gordon Research Conferences , the 2003 RNA Editing meeting will be conducted in a relaxed setting that fosters informal discussion between participants .
Speakers will be selected based on the significance and quality of their recent scientific contributions , as well as with the goal of achieving diversity among age , gender , and ethnicity .
All attendees will be invited to present a poster and , funds permitting , travel awards will be made to select graduate students and postdoctoral applicants .
During its lifecycle , a plant is exposed to a wide range of abiotic and biotic stresses that can cause production of reactive oxygen species ( ROS ) in excess of that normally generated by metabolism and for signaling in the absence of stress .
Although all subcellular compartments produce ROS , chloroplasts are the major ROS source in photosynthetic tissues .
In order to avoid oxidative damage and death , plants have evolved an interconnected , complementary network of compounds ( e.g. , ascorbate , tocopherols , carotenoids , glutathione ) , enzymes ( e.g. , superoxide dismutases , peroxidases , catalases ) and biochemical responses ( e.g. , non-photochemical quenching ) that serve to minimize plastid ROS production under stressful conditions or rapidly detoxify excess ROS species or byproducts that are produced .
Tocopherols , more commonly known as Vitamin E , are the major lipid soluble antioxidant in plastids and are proposed to be an essential component of the plastid antioxidant network .
Studies in mammals and artificial membranes indicate tocopherols are important for membrane structure , quenching of singlet oxygen and other ROS , scavenging of chain-propagating lipid peroxy radicals and other non-antioxidant functions related to signaling and transcriptional regulation .
In plants , tocopherols are assumed to function similarly though experimental evidence for this is lacking .
During the past five years , the DellaPenna laboratory has cloned all enzymes of the tocopherol biosynthetic pathway in Arabidopsis and developed mutant/transgenic lines whose leaves are completely deficient in tocopherols or accumulate tocopherols at 4-5 times wild type levels .
These tocopherol-modified lines will be used1 .
To define the role ( s ) of tocopherols in scavenging specific ROS species and control of lipid peroxidation .
2 .
In genetic combinations with mutations that affect other components of the antioxidant network to assess functional compensation and redundancy of antioxidant network components.3 .
To study a novel germination phenotype in tocopherol deficient lines.4 .
In whole genome expression analysis to assess the response of individual antioxidant network genes and other cellular components to tocopherol modifications .
Tocopherols , more commonly known as Vitamin E , are the major lipid soluble antioxidant in chloroplasts of all plants and are proposed to be an essential component of the plastid antioxidant network .
The research being undertaken will provide a comprehensive understanding of tocopherol function ( s ) in photosynthetic tissues of Arabidopsis .
This work will also define and characterize the integration and complementation of tocopherols with and by other components of the plastid antioxidant network ( Vitamim C , carotenoids and enzymes that scavenge reactive oxygen ) .
Because of the evolutionary conservation of the antioxidant network in chloroplasts , the data obtained will be of direct relevance to a wide range of plant species and crops .
Plant species characterized by short-distance dispersal ( e.g .
ant-dispersed species ) arehypothesized to be absent from suitable habitat due to dispersal limitation while species characterized by long-distance dispersal ( e.g .
bird-dispersed species ) are often present in unsuitable ( sink ) habitat due to frequent re-colonization and rescue .
These two hypotheses are being tested in a study of the demography and distribution of six forest-understory herb species in a region extending from the lower Piedmont of Georgia to the upper elevations of the Blue Ridge .
Among the goals of the study are 1 ) to develop a rigorous method of delineating suitable habitat by measuring the demographic response of each species to environmental variation , with particular emphasis on responses to soil moisture and light availability , and 2 ) to use this methodology to test hypotheses about how habitat suitability , demography , and dispersal interact to influence species distributions .
In addition to continuing to follow the demography of approximately 15,000 marked individuals , the proposed research will test hypotheses specific to the biology of each of the six study species .
The proposed research will help understand and evaluate the impact of climate and land-use change on biological diversity .
A detailed knowledge of factors controlling the distribution of the study species will help policy analysts evaluate the potential negative impacts of global change and help resource managers better protect threatened species in times of global change .
Graduate and undergraduate students will participate actively in all aspects of the research , gaining experience in experimental design , demographic studies , data management , statistical analysis , and preparation of results for presentations and publication .
The proposed research will investigate the morphology of ion-containing polymers , in particular ionomers , using model materials and a variety of analytical electron microscopy ( AEM ) methods .
Ionomers are random copolymers with a majority of non-polar monomeric units and a minority ( ~5-10 mol % ) of polar monomeric units , typically acids such as -COOH .
The acid groups can be neutralized with cations to create ionic species such as -COO-Na+ in the case of a Na-neutralized carboxylic acid .
Because these ionic species are considerably more polar that the surrounding matrix , there is a driving force for the ionic species to microphase separate and form ionic aggregates although the resulting morphologies of ionic aggregates are not well understood .
Controlling the morphologies of ionomers is the primary goal of the proposed research and the first step to developing both a predictive theoretical model of these materials and a robust understanding of their structure-property relationships .
These ionic aggregates act as physical crosslinks to toughen the polymer and lead to both current industrial applications ( chemically resistant thermoplastics , tough coatings , permselective membranes for fuel cells , and food packaging materials ) and a variety of potential technological applications ( e.g .
protection against chemical warfare ) .
These complex polymeric materials spur scientific interest , because ( 1 ) these amphiphilic materials have ionic interactions that mimic biological macromolecules , ( 2 ) ionomers are readily available with a wealth of chemistries that includes amorphous and semicrystalline polymers and a range of cations , and ( 3 ) high-resolution analytical tools are now available to investigate the interdependencies of chemistry , processing , morphology and properties .
Winey 's scanning transmission electron microscopy ( STEM ) studies of ionomers since 1998 provide a valuable foundation to the proposed research in which Winey endeavors to identify the materials parameters and processing conditions that have the most substantial influence on the ionomer morphologies .
The proposed work seeks to uncover reliable trends in the ionomer morphology in order to provide fundamental understanding of these complex materials .
As Winey determines how the various materials and processing parameters influence the ionomer morphology they will be able to control the ionomer morphology .
Two hallmarks of the proposed experimental plan are ( 1 ) the use of model materials , that is materials designed to address specific scientific questions , and ( 2 ) the use of multiple characterization tools including SAXS , FT-IR , and , in particular , a range of analytical electron microscopy ( AEM ) methods .
Industrial , academic and military scientists have scientific interest in both the proposed research about ion-containing polymers and the development of AEM characterization tools for polymers .
Winey will collaborate with the Lehigh Microscopy School to ensure that electron microscopists take full advantage of the AEM methods that are used within the proposed work to investigate complex , chemically heterogeneous polymeric materials .
In addition , Winey will continue to both serve as a faculty co-advisor to the Society of Women Engineers on Penn 's campus and hold an annual panel about opportunities for graduate studies and academic careers in engineering .
Most night-flying moth locate mates through female production of , and male response to very precise blends of three or more species specific airborne chemicals .
Within a species , females that produce atypical blends are not as attractive as other females .
Similarly , rare males that have genes for response to an altered blend are expected to be less reproductively fit than normal males .
Based on our current understanding of the genetics and mechanics of sexual communication in moths , evolution is expected to select against the proliferation of new sexual communication systems .
However , there are currently thousands of moth species , each with a unique system of communication .
Our goal is to hybridize two closely related moth species that differ in their pheromones and male responses .
We will map sexual communication genes and develop strains with single genetic differences in pheromone production or response to determine if and to what extent their fitness is decreased in a number of environmental conditions.There are many complex traits for which diversification is expected to be hindered in early evolutionary stages .
We expect the information from our work on moths to provide general insight into how traits that are expected to be conserved , can diversify .
0235883Cummings The Workshop on Molecular Evolution , now in its 12th year of NSF support , is held for two weeks in the summer at the Woods Hole , MA , Marine Biological Laboratory to provide a rich and intensive learning experience for 60 students in the broad field of molecular evolutionary studies .
Specific workshop objectives include ( 1 ) to provide advanced training in practical , theoretical , and analytical aspects of molecular evolution ; ( 2 ) to provide advanced training in computational resources and statistical and modelling techniques related to molecular biology , phylogenetics , and population genetics ; ( 3 ) to promote molecular evolutionary approaches to questions in biological fields like anthropology , conservation genetics , development , behavior , physiology , and ecology ; and ( 4 ) to expand accessibility and reach of the Workshop through the workshop 's web site .
These objectives are realized through a series of lectures by invited specialists , demonstrations , and computer training for 60 students drawn from throughout the country and abroad .
Students receive intensive , high-level instruction and hands-on training in the use of major software employed in molecular evolutionary studies .
Workshop faculty also learn about the latest developments in the field , and from each other , in ways that promote their own scientific research .
Teaching assistants extend their knowledge and understanding of recent developments , assist in computer laboratory demonstrations and tutorials , and lead discussions regarding teaching strategies and pedagogy .
The workshop helps promote understanding of molecular evolution and evolutionary genomics to society at large , and has involved science reporters and other communicators in years past as well as scientists from other Federal agencies .
The genomes of all organisms contain DNA sequences called promoters that control gene expression .
The goal of this project is to understand how these regulatory sequences vary genetically within populations .
We will survey variation in regulatory sequences from several genes in the purple sea urchin , an animal model system that is particularly favorable for such analyses .
We will then test the function of variant sequences for their ability to bind specific proteins that regulate gene expression .
Finally , we will screen for promoter sequence variants that alter the timing of gene expression .
Studies of human genetics have revealed extensive variation in promoter sequences and in their regulatory function .
Our meta-analysis of this data , published earlier this year , was the first study to provide direct evidence that differences in regulatory sequences comprise a substantial fraction of the total functional genetic variation within a population .
The current project will extend these studies in an organism where we can analyze an unbiased sample of genetic variation in regulatory sequences that has a functional impact .
The results of these analyses will advance understanding of the population genetics of a portion of the genome that is functionally critical but understudied .
Fishes of the family Labridae are a diverse group of nearly 600 species that inhabit tropical and temperate marine waters throughout the world and constitute a major segment of the diversity found on coral reefs .
Advances in our understanding of the labrid family tree and study of the biomechanics of feeding behavior will allow exploration of evolution in coral reef fishes .
The first goal of this project is to collect new DNA sequence data for several species groups within the Labridae .
With previous NSF support , a family tree for the Labridae was generated using data for 115 species .
Resolution of phylogenetic relationships on this tree was excellent based on four genes from different parts of the cell ( 2 each from the mitochondrion and the nucleus ) .
However several large species groups remain unresolved .
In this project , sequences of genes that are appropriate for species-level questions will be obtained for 120 additional taxa .
In addition , this project will investigate two genes involved in early growth and development of fish skulls .
These include Otx1 , a gene that plays a role in head growth and Dlx2 , a gene involved in both lower jaw formation and tooth development .
Sequences for these genes will be collected in 50 species , having diverse skull structures and jaw anatomy .
Thus , this study will provide new information from many species and many genes , some of which have known regulatory involvement in building a key part of the animal , the skull .
The second objective of the proposal is to combine evolutionary trees with concepts from engineering design and knowledge of feeding behavior to study skull function .
Specific hypotheses of evolutionary convergence will be tested to determine whether the same engineering solution has been achieved multiple times in the history of the group .
The extreme modifications of jaws and skull found in this family make them a model system for evolution in cranial structure and function .
Biomechanical engineering models allow calculation of basic feeding mechanics such as jaw closing force and speed , and jaw protrusion .
Biomechanical models , generated as physical constructs and computer models , are useful for research and education .
Combining evolution with function in many species , this project will examine evolutionary change in the biomechanics of one of the most diverse radiations of vertebrates on Earth .
The movement toward an integrated understanding of biological structure and function , from genes to tissues to whole organisms , is one of the major frontiers of biology .
This project contributes to that goal by testing specific hypotheses of functional evolution using molecular phylogenies and engineering concepts .
This project contributes to education , training , exhibits , and research infrastructure in many ways .
The Principal Investigator teaches undergraduate courses at the University of Chicago and lab exercises are held each year in the collections of the Field Museum .
Students at the college , graduate , and postdoctoral levels are involved with all aspects of the proposed research , including sequencing , analysis , and biomechanics .
Collaborations are underway with people from Austria , Australia , Chile , Kenya , Madagascar , New Zealand , The Philippines , and Thailand .
Museum exhibits are now on display that feature models of fish head function developed from NSF-funded research , and exhibits are planned to feature both phylogenetic and functional research at the Field Museum .
The PI gives museum lectures , has spoken on public radio , visits local schools , and presents coral reef fish biology to groups such as Elder Hostel and Rotary in the Chicago area .
Physical and computer models of animal function featured in this proposal are fantastic tools for classroom education , research training , and museum exhibits .
0235917WilliamsArthropods can be found in virtually every habitat on earth - a radiation driven in large part by the diverse specializations of their limbs .
In spite of the enormous variability in limb structures , the initial comparative studies of genes that pattern limbs have emphasized conserved patterns of gene expression .
Perhaps this is because similarities to the model system ( Drosophila ) are more easily explicable than differences .
However , Drs .
Nagy and Williams seek to understand the morphological diversification of arthropod limbs .
To this end , they propose a series of experiments to dissect the function of both genes whose expression varies from the known Drosophila pattern and ones whose expression is conserved .
They use the insect- crustacean clade for this analysis since crustaceans have extremely diverse limb morphologies , while insects have the best studied molecular mechanisms of limb formation .
Their goal is to uncover mechanisms underlying the generation of morphological diversity among insect-crustacean limbs .
They approach this goal using both descriptive , genetic and experimental studies on a variety of species .
Because these studies involve a number of both insect and crustacean species , they provide a framework for inferences as to the ancestral patterning circuitry for the insect/crustacean lineage .
In addition , because they evaluate function in both conserved and varying genes , these studies will be informative about how a similar set of genes has been redeployed throughout evolution.Broader impact This project promotes education at multiple levels of inquiry .
Some of the proposed work forms the basis of graduate training ; other aspects will form undergraduate research projects .
Continued analysis of results from the previously funded project will become an online lesson plan in genetics and development , created in a high school teacher education program .
The results of our research will be published in scientific journals and regularly presented at local , national and international meetings and discussed in undergraduate classes , seminars , and online discussion sections .
The arthropods maintained in laboratory culture provide a much needed resource to local pre- and elementary schools and high school science classes .
This Symposium on Comparative & Integrative Vision Research is part of the annual meeting of the Society for Integrative & Comparative Biology ( SICB ) .
It addresses recent advances in vision , with a plan that integrates multidisciplinary work including development , molecular biology , optics and sensory ecology , and evolution .
The meeting emphasizes interdisciplinary interactions among newer and more established investigators .
Introduction of new people to the society is enhanced by the international aspect of the meeting in Toronto , Canada .
Funding assists with travel awards for participants to attend the meeting .
The impact extends beyond sensory neuroscience to the fields of sensory ecology and evolutionary biology , by discussions at the meeting and publication in the journal Integrative & Comparative Biology .
There is a further impact on scientific education and training by the emphasis on graduate and undergraduate participation .
The PIs plan mapping and sampling features on the Cocos and Nazca plates to provide a basis for inferring the properties of the subducted Cocos plate under Central America .
The basic premise is that the Nazca plate south of Grijalva was formerly contiguous with Cocos plate under Nicaragua and parts of Costa Rica and that this fossil plate boundary could form an important structure in the down-going slab .
Because a small fragment remains unsubducted , the investigators propose to not only study it , but also it 's conjugate off Peru , where much more remains .
At that locality , the structure can be mapped more thoroughly and the results extrapolated to the subducted slab beneath Costa Rica .
Further , dredging will provide essential samples to measure the composition of the lithosphere that is beneath the Central American arc .
EIA-0203924Choset , HowardCarnegie Mellon UniversityTITLE CISE Postdoctoral Associates in Experimental Computer Science Topologically Inspired Multi-Agent Robotic Systems with Coverage TasksThe proposed research will contribute to the development of the underlying science in using topological information encoded in a free space to spatially allocate members of a multi-agent team to achieve a particular task .
Converge path planning ( a new motion planning approach that determines a path ensuring a robot 's end effector will pass over all points in a target region ) will be used as the focusing task for multi-robot team allocation theory development and experimental verification .
The postdoctoral associate and the principal investigator will consider how to decrease the time of operation ( i.e. , work in parallel ) and create qualitative synergies among robots working together in a team .
The expected outcome is a new geometric result based on Kalman filtering theory , which will support planning optimal motions for agents engaged in mutual positioning .
The associate will also participate in educational activities , specifically including robotic LEGO modules for undergraduate and middle school education .
Spectroscopy makes optical sensing and imaging a powerful tool relative to other modalities .
However , a large number of domains of interest have significant degrees of scatter , thereby precluding direct interpretation of optical measurements using standard holographic or spectroscopic techniques .
For instance , using light it may be possible to detect tumors at an early stage and to determine blood chemistry using safe and inexpensive instruments , with correct interpretation of the influence of scatter .
Environmental sensing applications include measurements of or within aerosols , turbid water , sea ice , and snow .
There has also been significant recent interest in random media with optical gain , which may find application in displays and for inexpensive lasers .
Coherent light in all these situations can produce speckle .
While efforts have been made in some applications to reduce the confounding impact of speckle , such as in optical coherence tomography , speckle has the potential to determine important properties of the scattering medium .
They have used frequency correlations of laser speckle to characterize diffusely scattering material .
This characterization involves determining impulse response or scattering parameters that can be used to form spatial images and to extract quantitative spectroscopic data .
Of particular note , the PIs recently showed that it is possible to use third order speckle intensity correlations to directly determine the impulse response of a scattering medium , independent of a model , extending the second order intensity interferometer concept of Hanbury-Brown and Twiss.This project involves the study of fundamental aspects of speckle , with a view toward several applications .
The PIs will extend their single linearly polarized speckle measurement to a set of input/output polarizations , and couple this data to a polarized transport model that will be developed .
This should allow treatment of varying degrees of scatter and also characterization of the scatterers .
They will also investigate source correlation concepts .
The investigator proposes to study the renormalization of period integrals on GL ( n ) .
More specifically , this project concerns the development of a theory of truncation of GL ( n ) Eisenstein series , thereby leading to a definition of renormalized torus integrals .
Such results in turn make it possible to compute the polar divisor of the integrals and therefore to find unexpected functional equations of renormalized period integrals of Eisenstein series.This is a project in Number Theory , one of the oldest branches of mathematics .
The foundations of Number Theory lie in the study of the positive integers .
Some basic objects that have emerged in Number Theory are automorphic forms , objects that possess surprising symmetries .
This project studies certain integrals of particular automorphic forms called Eisenstein series .
These integrals , if interpreted in the usual way , are infinite , so part of the proposed research deals with reinterpreting these integrals , using renormalization to give them a definite meaning .
This has already been carried out by the investigator in a special case , which gave rise to a relationship with another renormalized integral that was developed in a different fashion .
More striking , however , was the occurrence of an unexpected symmetry in four dimensions .
The aim of this project is to extend this technique of renormalization to the most general case , and to look for generalizations of this unexpected phenomenon .
Abstract for 0203334This award provides support for a one-day workshop of separations specialists to identify needs and opportunities for research on capture and sequestration of carbon dioxide .
Carbon dioxide is the leading greenhouse gas that may be responsible for global warming .
Much carbon dioxide is produced by power plants and by transportation as well as industrial operations .
To deal with the potential treats of global warming it is desirable to develop efficient and economical methods for separating and stabilizing carbon dioxide so that discharges to the atmosphere can be controlled .
The experts attending the workshop will provide guidance to NSF regarding appropriate research investments in this area.The workshop is being organized by the University of Colorado .
It will be held at Tulane University during the week of March 11 , 2002 .
It is planned to coincide with an AIChE conference that will offer a symposium on global warming .
Thus , a number of experts will be available at that site .
It is expected that staff from DOE will also participate so the workshop should provide an opportunity for coordination of research efforts by the two agencies .
The impact will be to enhance development of greenhouse-gas-control technology for the protection of the global environment .
This grant supports the management of the 2002 US/Africa/South American Materials Workshop on Civil Infrastructure and Manufacturing that will be held January 6-7 , 2002 in San Juan , Puerto Rico .
This international workshop will host eleven scientists and engineers from North America and none of their counterparts from Africa , South America , Asia and Europe .
On the first day , invited papers on materials for infrastructure and development , and papers on materials and manufacturing are scheduled .
The second half-day will focus on discussion , planning future interactions and collaborations , and drafting a workshop report .
In addition to reporting the workshop results by publications , they will immediately be reported to the broader research community attending the 2002 National Science Foundation 's Design , Service and Manufacturing Grantees and Research Conference at the same venue on January 7-10 , 2002.Developing the infrastructure to support the global practice of engineering and manufacturing is a key issue for the economic well being of all nations .
This group of experts from around the world will advise and develop a joint agenda on collaboration among nations to provide the technical and educational infrastructure needed for the 21st century .
The Global Change SysTem for Analysis , Research and Training ( START ) , as the major international outreach program of three of the major international global change research programs - the World Climate Research Programme ( WCRP ) , the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme ( IGBP ) , and the International Human Dimensions ( of Global Environmental Change ) Program ( IHDP ) - will undertake efforts to develop scientific capabilities in global change research in developing countries of Asia , the Pacific , and Africa .
START will also promote collaboration in global change research and related scientific activities among scientists from the countries of these regions and between scientists from these countries and scientists from the United States and other countries with advanced capabilities in global change research.START will focus on six scientific areas of high priority for the international programs and for U.S. research on global change .
These areas are ( 1 ) regional climate variability and change ; ( 2 ) changes in the composition of the atmosphere and its effects ; ( 3 ) land use/land cover change , especially its biophysical and biogeochemical aspects ; ( 4 ) interaction between global change and terrestrial ecosystems and their biodiversity ; ( 5 ) interaction between global change and oceans , coastal zones , and inland waters and their biodiversity ; and ( 6 ) scientific problems that cut across these areas , e.g. , interactions between global change and food systems and between global change and water resources.These activities are expected to lead to improved understanding of global change and its particular characteristics and consequences in Asia , the Pacific , and Africa ; improved and expanded input from the scientists of these regions to global efforts , especially to global modeling ; and improved scientific capabilities in these regions to contribute to and participate in global change research at local , regional and global levels .
In Asia and the Pacific , START will collaborate closely with the Asia-Pacific Network for Global Change Research ( APN ) .
START will extend the monitoring system for extreme events it has developed in northern Africa to other parts of the continent and will convene a workshop on the relationship of global change to freshwater resources , with a special focus on the arid and semi-arid regions of Africa .
START will work closely with the Third World Academy of Sciences ( TWAS ) to assure full and active participation by African scientists in these activities .
Two other areas of emphasis in Africa will be ( 1 ) the interactions between global change and food systems and ( 2 ) land use/land change/ecosystem variability , both areas of exceptionally high priority for African countries .
START will also extend efforts to assess the impacts of and adaptation to climate change in southern Africa , particularly by promoting development of a network for this process and development of analytical tools for such an assessment .
START will also address polar coastal zones and change in these zones by convening a synthesis and futures meeting to bring together scientists active in the Russian Arctic to review past research on changes in coastal zones in the Arctic and their relationship to global change and then to consider how best to plan future research in this area .
0203224Ileana StreinuSmith CollegeWorkshops on Topics in Computational GeometryThis proposal is to support a series of annual problem-posing and problem-solvingworkshops on emerging new topics in Computational Geometry , with applications in Graphics , Robotics , CAD , BioComputing , etc .
The requested funds will support students , post-docs and some invited participants .
The workshop is aiming at fostering collaborations between disciplines ( mathematics , computer science , engineering ) , identifying new directions and problems to work on , and engaging representatives from under-represented groups in collaborative research opportunities ( we anticipate about half of the participants to be female researchers or students ) .
A new topic will be chosen each year by the organizer .
A web page will be prepared for each workshop , which will include links to resulting publications .
There will be no registration fee .
The chosen location ( Bellairs Research Institute of McGill University in Barbados , West Indies ) already has a long tradition within our community ( McGill researchers have very successfully organized such workshops on various topics for over 15 years , and the institute 's facilities have been used by other academic institutions in the US and Canada ) .
It allows for informal and very productive interaction , it has inexpensive lodging and is accessible via major US carriers atreasonably priced airfare .
NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0203301Mathematical Sciences Collaborative Research Absolute and essential instabilities in spatially extended systemsAbstract0203301 ScheelThis project explores several instability mechanisms of coherent states , such as fronts , pulses and spiral waves , that occur in spatially extended systems far from equilibrium .
The common theme of these mechanisms is that they involve transport phenomena caused by diffusion and nonlinearities .
Examples of such transitions are backfiring instabilities of fronts , period-doubling bifurcations of spiral waves , and the effect of inhomogeneities on the dynamics of spiral waves .
While transport is most conveniently modeled and described using an idealized unbounded domain , boundaries may well enhance or inhibit the instability through partial reflection or generation of waves .
It is the aim of this project to develop techniques that can help to investigate instability mechanisms simultaneously on bounded and unbounded domains .
One of the expected outcomes will be a description of instability mechanisms that is robust with respect to typical boundary conditions in large reactors .
Technically , our approach is based on methods from spatial dynamics that allow us to derive sharp pointwise estimates which capture explicitly the effects of boundaries.Complicated spatio-temporal patterns that arise due to the interplay of chemical reactions and diffusion have been observed experimentally in a number of specific reactions ( among them the Belousov-Zhabotinsky reaction and the chlorite-iodide-malonic acid reaction ) .
Similar phenomena have been observed during fibrillation of cardiac tissue where spiral waves act as organizing centers for the complex spatio-temporal dynamics .
Other examples where irregular patterns occur are the interaction of pulses in oscillatory media , backfiring of excitation pulses in catalytic reactions , and optical bistability in nonlinear photonic gratings .
The focus of this project is to analyze some of these instability mechanisms by analytical means .
This will not only further our understanding of pattern formation in chemical and biological systems , but will eventually allow for a systematic control of patterns , for instance , in the catalytic oxidation of carbon-monoxide and in the propagation of calcium waves in intracellular tissue .
0203207MuellerThis U.S.-Mexico award will support Dr. Peter Mueller of the University of Texas M.D .
Anderson Cancer Center , in a research collaboration with Dr. Andres Christen of CIMAT in Guanajuato , Mexico .
The researchers intend to work on sequential design approaches in the context of sampling designs for estimating species diversity and for inference about areas of high habitat potential .
Appropriate probability models for these applications will involve optimal sequential design strategies , using a hybrid strategy of reduced action spaces and Monte Carlo simulations.The collaborators will bring complementary skills to the project with the Mexican collaborators contributing expertise in inference for biodiversity , and the U.S. collaborators contributing research focus and experience in simulation-based optimal Bayesian design .
Both investigators also have extensive research experience in Bayesian data analysis , modeling , and simulation .
The involvement of graduate students will broaden the basis of the collaboration .
EIA-0203958 Anupam Joshi University of Maryland-Baltimore County Agent Oriented Approaches to a Ubiquitous GridAt the level of computing and networking hardware we will see dramatic changes in the next few years .
Computing will become pervasive .
These developments will lead to wireless networks that will scale all the way from ad hoc body area networks to satellite WANs , and link together supercomputers , palmstations and embededded sensors & controllers.Given this scenario , our proposed research will seek to extend the computational grid by making it ubiquitous and pervasive .
In particular , we will develop agent based runtime systems where each component is autonomous , articulate , social and adaptive .
Such a system will seamlessly partition computation across elements of the grid ranging from palmtops to supercomputers .
Issues that we will investigate include ( i ) Component/Service Discovery , ( ii ) Dynamic Composition of components , and ( iii ) computation partition across highly asymmetric and heterogeneous systems .
EIA-0203974 Chrisochoides , Nikos P. College of William and Mary Mesh Generation and Optimistic Computation on the Grid .
The goal of this proposal is to investigate exactly these issues using an identified application as a test case .
Mesh generation and dynamic manipulation is an integral part of many important scientific computing applications and must take place on the same platform with the rest of the application .
Mesh generation is a memory-intensive application with major impact on the overall performance of the end-to-end field simulations-an important class of applications that could benefit greatly from a grid platform .
Traditional approaches for generating , partitioning , and placing very large meshes have tow weakness when used on grids ( i ) I/O and data movement due to mesh re-partitioning , for adaptive applications , is prohibitively expensive , and ( ii ) there is a trade-off between the performance of field solvers and the quality of the resulting elements and partitions .
ABSTRACT0203113/0203426Burer , SamuelIowa StateIn a semidefinite programming ( SDP ) problem , a linear function of a symmetric matrix variable X is minimized subject to linear equality constraints on X and the essential constraint that X be positive semidefinite .
Many mathematical optimization problems can be cast as SDP problems including linear programs , convex quadratic problems with convex quadratic inequality constraints , matrix norm minimization problems , and a variety of maximum and minimum eigenvalue problems .
In addition , SDP has many applications in combinatorial optimization , engineering , statistics , and robust optimization.Today , there are numerous algorithms and codes available for solving SDPs , and these methods can be loosely grouped into two classes second-order interior-point ( IP ) methods and first-order nonlinear programming ( NLP ) methods .
The choice of which class to use for a particular application is determined primarily byproblem size -- - second-order IP methods are more efficient on small- to medium-scale problems while first-order NLP methods are better for large-scale problems .
In this project funded by the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division , Herman will develop numerically efficient and accurate semiclassical methods to evaluate quantum transition probabilities and correlation functions in nonequilibrium condensed-phase , gas-phase , and molecular-beam systems .
These density-evolution methods require consideration of the full quantum nature of the evolution only for times on the order of the loss of quantum phase coherence .
These methods are systematically correctable and provide an estimate of the calculational error at each level of approximation .
The procedures will be tested on simple model problems for which exact quantum results can be obtained and then on problems for which experimental data is available .
The results of calculations using these methods will also be compared with those obtained using other computational methods.At a time when experimental methods are able to characterize increasingly fast processes , it is imperative to develop theoretical formalisms that are capable of describing such processes .
The work proposed here addresses that need .
It further promises to provide a framework for analyzing and interpreting ultra-fast nonequilibrium processes in excited-state systems .
The planned extension of the methods to systems that are far from equilibrium will allow simulation of new classes of chemical reactions .
This proposal supports meetings and other activities of the National Academy of Science 's Board on Physics and Astronomy ( BPA ) .
The role of the Board is to identify important new developments at the scientific forefronts , foster interactions with other fields , strengthen connections to technology and facilitate effective service to the nation by the scientific community .
Members of the BPA are drawn from universities , industry and federal laboratories .
Meetings are devoted to evaluating activities being carried out under its auspices , discussing critical issues and developing new initiatives .
In general , studies initiated by the BPA focusing on particular areas of physics and astronomy are carried out by ad hoc groups of experts in those areas .
Reports produced by these groups will have considerale impact in shaping the future directions of the field .
Discrete models of the Euler equations governing fluid mechanics will be analyzed with the goal of understanding high Reynolds number turbulent flows .
The comprehensive approach will involve a combination of mathematical analysis of Hamiltonian dynamical systems , physical modeling based on discrete particle representations of the Euler equations , and high performance computing .
The mathematical problem is of N-body type , thus numerical algorithm development for these systems and dynamical systems visualization techniques will be an essential component of the work carried out under this award .
The four main projects described in the proposal are each designed to develop new analytical techniques in dynamical systems theory , test current techniques on models that are physically well grounded , develop new numerical algorithms and visualization methods for particle interaction problems , and push the models closer towards applications.This project involves the development of discrete models for fluid flow , using a combination of mathematical tools and high performance computing .
One major emphasis will be on studying these models on the surface of a sphere , both rotating and non-rotating , a problem which has direct applications to the flow in a planetary atmosphere on such large scales that the curvature of the planet plays a role in the dynamics .
This problem is potentially of great importance to the understanding of environmental processes in the atmospheres and oceans of Earth and to the large vortices , including the Red Spot , observed in the atmosphere of Jupiter .
This project is investigating and analyzing the role of undergraduate physics instruction at two-year colleges ( TYCs ) in encouraging students , particularly women and minorities , to pursue undergraduate degrees in physics as well as in other areas of science , technology , engineering and mathematics ( STEM ) .
The project is seeking to discover how some two-year colleges succeed in encouraging students to take introductory physics and then transfer to four-year institutions and become physics majors .
Based on information gathered through a survey of TYC physics activities and site visits to ten TYCs , the project is publishing a series of case studies that physicists in other two-year colleges can use to enhance their teaching of introductory physics and to encourage the production of STEM majors , particularly physics majors .
The SPIN-UP/TYC project is investigating the basic mechanism of change in the two-year college physics program .
The site visits and survey that this project is sponsoring seeks to identify the key personnel at the TYC responsible for implementing changes in the physics/science programs .
The project is also investigating ways to better bridge two-year college and four-year college physics faculty .
Better communication between these segments of the physics community not only encourage recruitment of physics majors and pre-service physics teachers in the TYCs and facilitate transfer to the four-year programs , it strengthens undergraduate physics as a whole.During the SPIN-UP/TYC project , information concerning teacher preparation ( particularly physics and physical science teaching preparation ) at two-year colleges is being gathered .
The teacher preparation information concerns both the processes and scope that selected two-year colleges use in their preparation of future teachers.The SPIN-UP/TYC project is a collaboration between the American Association of Physics Teachers , Lee College , and Southwest Texas Junior College in association with the American Institute of Physics and the American Physical Society .
AbstractPI Gerda ClaeskensProposal ID DMS-0203884Title Some problems related to model selectionThe first major contribution of this project is a study of nonparametric tests of function fit in the context of both density estimation and regression , hereby generalizing existing results in several directions .
The proposed apparatus can be applied to test the adequacy of any parametric family , subject to the usual conditions of regularity , and is also suitable for use in higher dimensions .
The second research topic focuses specifically on estimation after model selection and introduces a general approach to frequentist model averaging .
A third line of research addresses the problem of generalizing the methods mentioned above to the setting of missing data .
This will require the development of new model selection criteria .
The goal of nonparametric testing is to construct an omnibus test , consistent against essentially any alternative model .
Proposed tests are applicable to almost any parametric family of functions .
There are several reasons why model selection criteria and their asymptotic properties merit further study , one of the most important ones being that only a minority of the past research provides a full integration of model selection into statistical inference .
The traditional use of model selection methods in practice is to proceed as if the final selected model had been chosen a priori , without acknowledging the additional uncertainty introduced by model selection .
A general framework is developed , in which several modeling and estimation strategies can be included and compared .
Aspects of these problems are addressed first in the setting of complete data , and then in the general situation of missing data .
ABSTRACT DMS- 0203637The object of this proposal is to continue our research on the topics below using techniques such as complex analysis , spectral theory , non-linear analysis and ergodic theory i ) Spectral theory of the Laplacian on functions and forms - connections with ergodic theory .
ii ) Global injectivity theorems .
iii ) Topology of umbilics .
iv ) The generalized Hilbert theorem .
Topic i ) is a collection of problems coming from ( and relating to ) spectral and ergodic theory , dynamics , vanishing theorems and the topology of manifolds of non-positive curvature .
Topic ii ) is an outgrowth of our efforts to understand embeddedness of minimal surfaces .
It centers on the problem of finding conditions for a local diffeomorphism between non-compact manifolds to be injective.This type of question arises in areas of mathematics as diverse as algebraic geometry and mathematical economics .
Our methods here come from geometry , topology and global analysis .
Topic iii ) is a classical problem in differential geometry namely , understanding the topology of umbilical singularities .
The plan is to continue studying this problem as a question about the blow-up of certain hyperbolic partial differential equations .
Topic iv ) is also a classical problem , dealing with isometric immersions of hyperbolic spaces .
As in iii ) , we plan to approach this question as a blow-up problem.In our approach to research , starting with the earlier work on minimal surface theory , we have always sought to achieve a balance between technique and creative mathematics .
This proposal is full of problems and ideas coming from diverse areas , such as spectral theory , dynamical systems , hyperbolic equations , algebraic and Riemannian geometry .
We have already contributed to all these questions .
Given the variety of topics , we would like to believe that this proposal advances the internal conversation of mathematics .
On the other hand , the work on Global Inversion is potentially of interest to applied disciplines , since it addresses the question of solvability of systems of non-linear equations .
The International Children 's Digital Library requests funds for a series of stakeholdermeetings .
The purpose of the meetings is to explore and develop strategies for implementing acomprehensive digital library of children 's literature .
The Children 's Library is dedicated toproviding worldwide digital access to children 's literature .
The meetings will be held in conjunction with The Library of Congress ' Special Collection Division .
There will be six meetings focusing on specific interests writers , librarians , publishers , children 's advocates , technologists , and a summary meeting.The meetings will be held between January and June 2002 at The Library of Congressin Washington D.C .
The ability to make well-controlled structures on the nanometer scale represents one of the most important scientific advances of recent decades .
Such nanostructures are already in use in a variety of optoelectronic devices , and promise to be of increasing importance as communication speeds increase .
The fundamental physics of these structures lies in the quantum confinement of electrons .
However , the influence of such confinement on the ultrafast electronic interactions which determine both nonlinear optical response and relaxation rates is unclear .
This project will use ultrafast spectroscopy to determine how confinement influences interactions on the femtosecond time scale .
It begins with the development of a very pure set of semiconductor heterostructures with varying width .
These samples will then be studied via several ultrafast optical techniques to fully characterize the influence of confinement on ultrafast dynamics .
This project will take place at Williams College , an entirely undergraduate institution in which young students take active , central roles in research .
The research training provided by this project will allow ten undergraduates to become familiar with research , and specifically with cutting edge optical and electronic techniques , at the earliest point in their careers.The drive for increasing speed in communications and computers is pushing technology toward ever smaller semiconductor devices .
A fundamental question as these devices are developed is the following is smaller always faster , or is miniaturization not the best way to increase speed ?
This project begins to answer the question by exploring the ways in which electron interactions change as semiconductors become extremely small .
It will proceed by using an ultra-fast laser to inject energy into nanoscale semiconductor structures , and then to measure how those structures respond .
The results will demonstrate the ways size alters the fastest electronic interactions , which take place in less than a trillionth of a second .
This work is of both fundamental and technological importance , since these interactions ultimately allow electrons to relax after excitation , and thus set the speed limit for electronic and optical device performance .
This project will take place at Williams College , an entirely undergraduate institution in which young students step up to take active , central roles in research .
The research training provided by this project will allow tenundergraduates to become familiar with research , and specifically with cutting edge optical and electronic techniques , at the earliest point in their careers .
David Eisenbud will work on three groups of problems from commutativealgebra and algebraic geometry The use of exterior algebra methodsin projective geometry and their extension to toric geometry ; the studyof infinite free resolutions ; and the study of codimensions of determinantal ( and related ) ideals .
This last includes the circle of problems around the existence of vector bundles of low rank on projective spaces .
His activitywill also include the development of fundamental algorithms in computationalalgebraic geometry and their implementation in the Macaulay2 package written by Grayson and Stilllman .
By far the largest portion of the projectbudget is devoted to the support of graduate students .
This and the computationaltools produced by the project will broaden its impact.Algebraic geometry deals with geometric forms defined bysimple equations ( polynomials ) .
The subject is central in mathematicsbecause these forms include the fundamental examples in most disciplinesof mathhematics ; and it is important in the applications of mathematicsbecause these forms provide the models most often used in representingnature in equations or in the computer .
Over the last 150 years the group oftechniques called commutative algebra has been developed to study and unify thisand problems arising in number theory .
Much more recently it was realized thatan extension of commutative algebra into the noncommutative domain ofexterior algebras gives a fruitful new approach to some old problems in thisfield .
Independently , computers and algorithms became powerful enough to help research in algebraic geometry .
Eisenbud 's proposed work has to dowith some of the most classical problems in algebraic geometry as wellas with new uses of exterior algebra and computation in this domain , andhe will also continue his work developing computational tools for othersto use .
The largest part of his grant will be devoted to the supportof graduate students , whom he will train in these techniques and methods .
TITLE Towards Community Services Putting Parallel Network Services On-lineThis project will investigate a community service system architecture and run-time infrastructure needed to support such high-end services .
We will focus on two key run-time issues for performance dynamic resource management and scaling .
Dynamic resource management allows ( i ) resources to be { de- } allocated to service requests on-the-fly , ( ii ) resources to be acquired via negotiation , and ( iii ) resources to be shared across inter-service domains .
Resource management will be based on a performance estimation technique that learns service execution time as function of dependent inputs and resources allocated .
We will produce a set of next generation tools and libraries that can be leveraged by community services running in single-site clusters and in multi-site Grids .
The toolset will be evaluated by applying it to several high-end network services in the area of visualization , astronomy , and bioinformatics .
The PI proposes to1 .
Analyze AMANDA II data and a program , Eview , for muon propagation in ice.2 .
Develop and test a fused silica module.3 .
Develop a fluorescence data logger to be lowered at the time of drilling a hole in ice .
This device is to provide a way to characterize the optical property of ice as a function of depth.Funding for the duration of three years is recommendation .
Funding level for years two and three will depend on IceCube funding .
This research is aimed at the development of a new class of stimuli-sensitive polymers based on low polydispersity , poly-N-isopropylacrylamide homo- and co-polymer core-shell hydrogel particles ( microgels ) .
These nanostructures will allow for a high degree of control over the microgel porosity , deswelling magnitude , sharpness of the volume phase transition ( VPT ) , position of the VPT , responsivity to stimuli other than temperature , number of transitions to a specific stimulus , and kinetics of deswelling .
Accordingly , the proposed research is aimed at a systematic investigation of these parameters and their relationship with microgel structure .
A suite of techniques including dynamic light scattering , fluorescence resonance nonradiative energy transfer , differential scanning calorimetry , and electron microscopy will be used to investigate the morphology ( core compression , core-shell interpenetration , and phase separation ) of various core-shell morphologies .
The relationship between these structural characteristics and the thermodynamics and kinetics of the volume phase transition will then be investigated in order to establish a rational basis for the construction of complex microgel materials .
These studies will then lead to the synthesis of complex multifunctional microgels for two specific applications ( 1 ) fluorescent core-shell particles with ionochromic behavior for applications in metal ion sensing , and ( 2 ) hollow shells ( via controlled core degradation ) for encapsulation and controlled release applications .
Taken together , this effort will provide fundamental groundwork for the fabrication of nanostructured hydrogel materials.The significance of this work relates both to its fundamental scientific and societal impact .
Scientifically , it will expand our knowledge concerning the chemistry and physics of nanostructured colloidal hydrogels .
With respect to broader societal impact , these materials should have tremendous utility in numerous applications such as drug delivery , chemical sensing , chemical/biological separations , photonic materials , artificial muscles , micro-fluidics valves , and cell culture/tissue growth substrates , where advances in chemical sensing and drug delivery will be the focus of this work .
This award provides funding for a three-year , Combined Research-Curriculum Development ( CRCD ) program , entitled , Team Based Design Collaboration Across Time and Space , at Carnegie Mellon University , under the direction of Dr. Daniel P. Siewiorek .
The goal of this project is to facilitate computer-based collaborative learning in project-based design courses by developing collaboration tools for mobile computers .
0203922Bianchini , RicardoRutgers University New BrunswickCISE Postdoctoral Associates in Experimental Computer Science Low-Level Optimizations for Next-Generation Disk DrivesFile input/output ( I/O ) has traditionally been a performance problem for several applications .
The proposed research seeks to optimize the performance of file I/O operations by taking advantage of next-generation disk devices ( i.e. , devices with embedded and programmable high-performance processors ) .
The postdoctoral research associate will be involved with the introduction and evaluation of a new device-level architecture , new disk controller software , and modifications to standard host operating systems .
The expected outcomes are performance improvements for a wide spectrum of disk workloads , ranging from random and small file accesses to large sequential accesses .
Evaluations will employ combinations of detailed simulations and actual implementations along with native executions of disk-bound applications ( e.g. , video-on-demand , data mining ) .
Proposal Number DMS-0203975PI Andre de CarvalhoABSTRACTThe study of 2-dimensional dynamical systems is an active area ofresearch .
Families such as the Henon and Lozi families have beenintensively studied in recent years and many beautiful resultshave been obtained .
However , we are still far from having acomplete understanding of them .
In dimension 1 , due to theefforts of many researchers during the past two decades , there isan almost complete theory .
Parallels and differences between thedynamics of families in dimensions 1 and 2 have been exploited byseveral authors .
The past work of the PI includes the developmentof a 2-dimensional analogue of Milnor and Thurston 's kneadingtheory and the study of braids and braid forcing .
The presentproject proposes to further the study of dynamics in dimension 2as well as some aspects of braid theory and Teichmuller theory.The main topics to be studied are Horseshoe braids , Generalized pseudo-Anosov maps and piecewise linear models for diffeomorphisms in dimension 2 , Real and Complex Henon maps andthe Pruning Front Conjecture , Renormalization in dimension 2 , andsome aspects of infinite-dimensional Teichmuller Theory.Dynamical systems is the branch of mathematics that describessystems that evolve in time .
Typical examples are planetarymotion , population patterns , weather prediction or the economy.Since Newton , it is believed that simple mathematical laws arecapable of describing the long term behavior of many of suchsystems .
The problem is that often such simple mathematicallaws lead to extremely complicated long time behavior .
DMS-0203205Stephen A. MitchellThe proposed work is centered on K ( 1 ) -local homotopy theory and its applications to algebraic K-theory .
One goal of the project is to compute the mod 2 homology of the general linear group of a number ring .
A broader objective is a systematic study of K ( 1 ) -local homotopy theory from the perspective of Iwasawa theory , with a view toward applications to the algebraicK-theory spectra of number rings.One of the most striking features of modern mathematics is its essential unity .
Time and again one finds that seemingly unrelated branches of the subject interact in unexpected ways .
The interaction of of algebraic topology and number theory is a noteworthy example of this phenomenon .
Number theory began as a discrete subject , then turned analytic in the 19th century and increasingly geometric in the 20th .
In the last thirty years or so , algebraic topology ( the study of propertiesof geometric objects , such as curves and surfaces , that remain invariant under deformation ) has entered more and more into number-theoretic questions .
The proposed work will explore further the remarkable connections between these two subjects , by analyzing the topology of certain geometric objects that can be associated to classical number-theoretic data .
0203528Tara HutchinsonUniversity of California IrvineExpanding Engineering Thinking Interactive Visualization of Numerical ModelsThis project involves the development and application of a new interactive learning tool and the use of visualization techniques , enabled by the tool , in teaching engineering .
The overall goal of this project is to contribute to a redesigned engineering curriculum that better matches the practice of engineering in the 21st century .
The curriculum focuses on ( 1 ) visualization and hands-on manipulation , ( 2 ) computer-assisted design and virtual reality , ( 3 ) interactive learning , ( 4 ) critical thinking , ( 5 ) creative problem solving , and ( 6 ) problem-based learning .
These objectives are achieved through the redesign of existing courses and through the creation of a new interdisciplinary course .
The project directly addresses the connection of engineering with the changing needs of industry and society in merging technology areas by educating future engineers in the 'office of the future ' environment .
This instructional environment ( VizClass ) includes tele-conferencing capabilities , interactive whiteboards , spatial tracking and semi-immersive visualization operating within a completely wireless environment .
The VizClass system uses readily deployable , cost effective components , such that other academic institutions may easily replicate it .
The hardware configuration leverages existing technology where possible and introduces system components for the real-time control and the middleware required for fusing numerical solvers with visualization tools and hardware components .
Components of the environment include a series of interactive projection display boards ( white boards ) and a semi-immersive projection table or wall display controlled by a dedicated visualization server .
Digital whiteboards , with touch sensitive input surfaces , enable more accurate tracking of user input .
Active white board screens providing either an input or output workspace are linked via a high-speed ( large storage capacity ) server .
This in turn is connected to a numerical solver .
The solver receives feedback from the input or 'working ' screen in the form chosen by the user .
If the input-mode is of type equation , the solver manipulates the equations and outputs the solution as either a 2- or 3-dimensional visual object to the selected output device in either mono- or stereoscopic form , respectively .
Visual output can be a distorted or contoured mesh ( with , for example stresses , strains or heat distribution ) , or figures annotating important engineering parameters .
The advantage of teaching in this environment is the near-real time visual feedback articulating results of the solved equations utilizing the finite element method approach as applied to structural engineering , mechanics or electronics problems .
The VizClass is equipped with a wireless network , giving collaborators and students instant access to all available on-line resources .
The purpose of the project is to organize the InternationalConference on Modern Algebra in Vanderbilt University ( Nashville , TN , May 21-24 , 2002 ) in conjunction with the 19th Shanks lectures .
Professor Efim Zelmanov ( Yale University ) , has agreed to deliver the Shanks lecture .
The conference will focus on several fundamental areas of modern algebra and its applicationsgroup and semigroup theory , lattice theory and ordered tructures , model theory and universal algebra .
Current and future trends in modern algebra will be the general theme .
This grant will provide partial support for speakers , graduate students , post-doctoral students , and younger faculty.At a fundamental level , group theory , lattice theory , and model theory , the topics of this conference , are tools for understanding and analyzing symmetries and patterns in the world around us .
For example , crystallography , the study and analysis of crystals , used once for inproving transistors and used today for studying protein structures , has advanced as group theory and lattice theory have advanced .
As another example , codes may be thought of as man-made patterns , and as such advances in group theory , lattice theory , and model theory lead to advances in cryptography and cryptanalysis .
Interest in organic solid state chemistry has undergone explosive growth in recent years due to the broadly based recognition of the scientific challenges and technological importance attached to the discovery and study of new organic andpoilymeric materials .
Many scientists from other disciplines see opportunities for performing exciting research in this area .
The 2002 Electronic Processes in Organic Materials Gordon Research Conference will be held at Salve Regina University , Newport , Rhode Island from July 21-26 , 2002 .
The goal of the conference is to facilitate international collaborations and informatation exchange across a broad spectrum of researchers with interests in solid state organic materials .
The NSF funds will be used to support the attendance of 5 graduate students and post-doctoral scholars and 7 senior U.S. session chairs and invited speakers. % % % The Solid State Chemistry community continues to have direct impact on technological areas that are crucial to advancing societal needs through the design , synthesis and application new materials .
Specific area in which important advances are being made include organic superconductors , field-effect transisters , lasers , conducting wires , light emitting diodes and semiconductors .
J Since these technical areas are of very high priority to industry , students educated and trained in these multidisciplinary areas involving solid-state organic chemistry compete very well in the job market and go on to contribute in many significant ways to the global economy .
*** Homotopy TheoryType AwardNSF Org DMS LatestAmendmentDate March 28 , 2002 File a0203936Award Number 0203936Award Instr .
Standard Grant Prgm Manager Benjamin M. Mann DMS DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES MPS DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIENStart Date May 15 , 2002 Expires April 30 , 2005 ( Estimated ) ExpectedTotal Amt .
$ 101793 ( Estimated ) Investigator Charles W. Rezk rezk @ .math.uiuc.edu ( Principal Investigator current ) Sponsor U of Ill Urbana-Champaign 801 South Wright Street Champaign , IL 61820 217/333-2186NSF Program 1267 TOPOLOGYFld Applictn 0000099 Other Applications NEC Program Ref 0000 , OTHR , Abstract DMS-0203936Charles W. RezkThe goal of this project is to apply homotopy theoretic methods to algebraic problems .
There are two threads of ideas involved here .
One is the description of homotopy theory as a kind of topologically enriched category theory , as has been developed by Dwyer-Kan and many others .
Another thread is in the theory of commutative ring spectra ( a homotopy theoretic generalization of commutative ring theory ) , andin particular the development of a topological version of the algebraic de Rham complex of a ring.Homotopy theory is a branch of topology ; it arose as the study of certain invariant properties of spaces , namely those left unchanged by continuous deformations .
It is a surprising fact that there are deep analogies between the methods of the homotopy theory of spaces ( which would seem to be geometric and topological ) and those of several branches of algebra ( such as homological algebra , sheaf theory , and category theory ) .
For example , there is a close analogy between the way we can describe an algebraic object ( such as a group or ring ) bygiving generators and the relations between them , and the way we can describe a topological space by giving polyhedra and the way they are attached together to give the space .
The goal of this project is to develop certain homotopy theoretic methods in the context of ring theory and of category theory , and to allow them to be applied totraditional algebraic problems .
Two models of disordered systems , first-passage percolation ( FPP ) and stochastic Ising dynamics with random initial state , are the main focus of this proposal .
Rigorous unconditional results about the geometric features of lattice-based FPP models are hard to come by , largely due to technical difficulties associated with the anisotropy of the underlying lattice .
Models of Euclidean FPP take place on graphs constructed from a homogeneous Poisson process and enjoy complete statistical invariance under all rigid motions .
In this sense , Euclidean FPP is a natural setting in which to study geometric properties of FPP .
One objective of this proposal is to refine , for Euclidean FPP , existing estimates of key fluctuation exponents associated with these models with the ultimate goal of proving interesting qualitative results .
Another goal is to exploit a certain re-scaling relation that holds for Euclidean FPP to obtain results about the stochastic monotonicity of passage time viewed as a function of distance .
Other closely related open questions under investigation concern issues such as how massively a local perturbation of the Poisson particle configuration affects minimizing paths and how far parallel geodesics typically travel before coalescence .
In Stochastic Ising models , rules of dynamics interact with a random initial state to produce a system that evolves with time .
The state at any particular time is a configuration of +/-1 spins associated with the sites of some regular lattice ; the configuration at time 0 makes the spins i.i.d .
random variables .
For the homogeneous ferromagnetic models of this proposal , the dynamics tend to produce increasing agreement of spins for neighboring sites as time elapses .
Key matters of investigation concern how quickly and in what sense the system evolves to a limiting state as well as various percolation properties of the configuration as a function of time .
Disordered systems are a large class of probabilistic models generally motivated by problems arising in condensed matter physics and materials science .
First-passage percolation and other closely related models have served as a mathematical model for phenomena as seemingly diverse as properties of randomly porous media ( such as aquifers ) , the growth of cancerous tumors , and the propagation of cracks through brittle material .
Ising models capture the basic features of magnetized materials .
The proposed work aims at a rigorous understanding of some of the many fundamental mathematical properties of these models .
The research component of the proposal is to explore a new methodology for clock networks that explicitly accounts for the interplay between the various design factors .
The educational component will provide graduate student researchers with an interdisciplinary training in VLSI , optimization , and numerical computing .
Furthermore , the research results will be integrated in graduate courses at Purdue University.The design of clock networks is a fundamental problem in synchronous circuit synthesis , and requires trading off between design effort , physical resource costs and performance .
Most existing clock design methodologies do not explicitly perform this trade-off .
Instead , a design is first proposed , and then evaluated in terms of physical resource costs and performance , and the design repeated if necessary .
As a large number of such iterations may be required , the design effort is minimized with some simplifying assumptions .
One of these artificially imposed constraints is that of `` zero-skew '' , where it is required that all elements are clocked ( i.e. , switch ) at the same time-instant .
This requirement constrains the physical layout of clock distribution networks , as the variation in the arrival of the clock signal at the various switching elements must be held small .
Perhaps more important , as all circuit elements switch together , the demand from the power supply is not uniform over time but peaks sharply once every clock cycle .
This uneven demand on the power supply leads to what is commonly referred to as power-supply noise As the demands on the power supply peak sharply , its ability to deliver power degrades , leading to possibly degraded performance of the circuits.With these observations serving as the backdrop , we propose to develop a design methodology for clock networks that employs nonzero clock skews , and directly addresses the interplay between various factors that determine the trade-off between the design effort , physical resource costs and performance .
We present preliminary results that show that our approach holds much promise .
Specifically , we propose to perform together scheduling and synthesis of clock networks such that both power supply noise and physical resource costs are reduced .
Essential to our objectives is the efficient analysis of power supply noise .
We propose a framework and techniques for power-supply noise analysis that draw upon our past successes with model reduction techniques for interconnect modeling both in the time and frequency domain .
This RUI project uses simultaneous , variable temperature cathodoluminescence ( CL ) and electron beam induced current ( EBIC ) to image transport properties , with micron scale resolution , in the near-contact region for a variety of high resistivity materials and devices .
A new approach allows imaging of the motion of charge , in response to fixed-point generation .
This approach is similar to CL in that an electron beam is used to generate charge , but different in two significant ways the beam is not scanned during a given measurement and the collection of light allows for spatial resolution of the source of its emission .
The motion of charge is tracked by detecting the light emitted along its path .
Imaging will be used to view transport behavior , providing a new window on the transport of charge in the high field , highly non-uniform region adjacent to contacts , especially in high resistivity materials where space charge and internal fields play dominant roles over extended distances .
Specific research goals include the study of charge transport patterns near contacts in SiC devices , improved understanding of contact performance and reproducibility in photorefractive heterostructures and direct imaging of electric field profiles in high energy radiation detectors .
In addition , the technique has potential for directly observing fundamental changes in transport behavior in the near-contact region .
A thermoelectrically cooled CCD will be used to image the light emitted in response to the point generation of charge in a semiconductor material .
In standard CL , the spatial information of the emitted light is lost as the total emission signal is displayed as a function of position of the generation point .
That information is maintained in this approach by using an internal optical microscope to collect and re-image the luminescence pattern .
A magnification of ~ 1000-2000 x can be obtained , suggesting spatial resolution of the luminescence on the order of five microns or better , depending on generation conditions .
% % % The project addresses fundamental research issues in a topical area of materials science having technological relevance .
Undergraduate students will play a primary role in the project , with opportunities for research integrated directly into their academic program , and continued full time in the summer .
The research program will also enable access to a state-of-the-art microanalysis facility for a wide variety of students , in addition to those engaged directly in the proposed project .
An important feature of the project is the strong emphasis on education , and the integration of research and education .
*** 0203466Nicolas-BolnetThis UMEB project seeks to increase the participation of students from under-represented groups at two New York City colleges by engaging them in hands-on research projects in conservation genetics and environmental science in collaboration with scientists at their colleges and at the American Museum of Natural History .
In order to accomplish this , each year a cohort of 4-6 students from each college will be recruited and the students will conduct research projects over a two year period .
During the academic year , the research will be done on the home campuses .
Over the winter breaks and summers , research will be conducted at the American Museum of Natural History .
These students will serve as a nucleus to get other students involved in environmental projects throughout the metropolitan area .
This UMEB project will involve students in workshops in molecular biology techniques , seminars in population biology , and workshops that provide graduate school and career guidance .
The students will be closely mentored and their progress monitored and assessed in order to help them become our future scientists in environmental biology and in order to develop additional programs capable of broadening participation in careers in environmental biology .
With National Science Foundation support , Dr. Sarah Wisseman and her colleagues employ a small , Portable Infrared Mineral Analyzer ( PIMA ) to locate the sources of stone materials used to make pipes and figurines dating to the Middle Woodland ( ca .
50 B.C .
to A.D. 250 ) period and later in the eastern United States .
This project unites archaeologists and geologists to better define the nature of materials used by prehistoric and historic societies in the Midwest and the relationships between raw material sources , production patterns , and trade of finished artifacts .
The PIMA spectrometer is an accurate and precise addition to modern analytical instruments , with the advantages that it is easy to operate , fast ( 30 seconds per reading ) , and totally non-destructive .
The PIMA is equally useable in field or museum settings , and has been successfully used to determine mineral composition and likely source of valuable artifacts that can not be destructively sampled .
For example , PIMA readings were taken of a museum figurine thought to be from Mississippi , but with no documentation of provenance .
Surprisingly , analysis showed a good match with flint clay from quarries in eastern Missouri , known from the team 's previous work as the source of most of the Middle Mississippian ( ca .
A.D. 1000 to 1400 ) red goddess figurines found at or near the site of Cahokia in East St. Louis .
In another example , PIMA readings confirm a local source of pipestone for Hopewellian ( Middle Woodland ) pipes found in northern Illinois , negating the earlier theory that all such pipes were manufactured in Ohio and then traded to the west .
The PIMA technique is complementary to X-ray diffraction ( XRD ) , a well-established laboratory technique that is used by the team to check and refine compositional readings .
The research team is using both techniques to build a reference database of stone materials specific to the Midwest .
The current project will focus on a ) identification of source materials for pipes beyond those already identified in Scioto County , Ohio and Sterling , Illinois , and b ) sourcing catlinite , a red pipestone that has been consistently misidentified in the literature .
The catlinite problem has two key components defining the range of variation of catlinite composition , both between sources and within a single source such as Pipestone National Monument , MN ; and determining the extent of catlinite use by prehistoric and historic period Native Americans .
Since many artifacts in museum collections have never been tested by either PIMA or XRD , the team 's goal is to vastly expand the compositional database for pipes and figurines and to identify new , local sources of pipestones and catlinites that have not previously been documented .
The results will radically alter the picture of long-distance trade and exchange of prestige items in the Eastern Woodlands .
The terrorist attacks on September 11 , 2001 represent the greatest homeland threat to America since Pearl Harbor .
As in times of war , the attacks have prompted increased patriotism and national identification .
This small grant for exploratory research will examine Americans ' national versus racial/ethnic identifications in the wake of the terrorist attacks .
Among the questions to be addressed are the following How strongly do Americans identify with their national identity ?
Does national identity correspond with an inclusion of traditionally stigmatized groups ( e.g. , African Americans ) into the common national in-group ?
If so , is this inclusion observable in unconscious associations of stigmatized groups with the category American ?
Or , instead , is it merely a conscious extension of patriotism , unlinked to underlying representations of social categories ?
What factors predict the magnitude of these identity effects ?
Are these identities durable or will they fade over time ? The research entails a multi-site study of white Americans ' national identities and their inclusion of African- versus Arab-Americans relative to the broader category American .
To date , empirical examinations of the malleability of identity and inter-group bias have been largely limited to manipulations involving minimal groups of relatively low self-importance to participants .
The recent terrorist attacks represent a unique opportunity to explore the impact of extreme threats upon social identities of significant self-relevance .
National identities such as these are likely to be stable except in times of relatively severe national threat .
This proposal seeks to extend the PARINT software package for parallel integration , furnishing it with the characteristics of a Problem Solving Environment .
The main goals of the project are to offer a complete set of tools for composing problem secifications , compiling and running applications , while providing state-of-the-art problem solving power to the end user .
To this end , we propose adding new techniques for extending the PARINT problem domain , e.g. , to allow for a variety of integration regions , high dimensions , and singular integrated behavior .
These include a transformation interface , new distributed Quasi-Monte Carlo strategies and extapolation methods .
Specific contributions are in the development of numerical techniques and evaluation of parallel integration algorithms .
Important issues in parallel and distributed computations such as load balancing are addressed , with an emphasis on loosely coupled and heterogeneous systems .
Other contributions are in the areas of user interfaces , visualization and web computing .
Proposal ID DMS-0203942PI Frits H. RuymgaartTitle Problems in ill-posed statistical inferenceAbstractThere is a renewed interest from the part of statisticians in solving noisy integral equations .
This kind of problem is ill-posed because the integral operator involved typically has an unbounded inverse and such models boil down to a generalization of traditional curve estimation .
The purpose of this proposal is to pursue the general theory that is being developed into three directions .
The first question is whether asymptotically efficient estimators of sufficiently smooth functionals of the input signal can be constructed despite the presence of the possibly unknown error density as an infinite dimensional nuisance parameter .
The second question to be dealt with is the asymptotic distribution of the integrated squared error centered at its mean .
Such precise asymptotic behavior of a global measure of accuracy has important applications to model checks .
Finally a new method expedient for convolution equations with mathematical irregularities will be developed .
The method is based on expansion in a wavelet basis coupled with inversion of the convolution operator in the time domain.Experimenters are often faced with the problem of recovering the input of a system when only the output is observable .
Typically the observations will be blurred by measurement error and statistical procedures become pertinent .
Examples include computer tomography employed in medical imaging , and Wicksell 's problem in stereology where a transform of the particle size distribution is observed .
Inverse heat conduction requires the recovery of the initial heat distribution ( input ) when the present one ( output ) is given .
There are many more examples and related questions .
For instance , can one estimate the total weight of a cable suspended at its endpoints , when only data regarding its shape are available ?
The construction of efficient estimators of such functionals of the input is one purpose of this research .
A second question considered is precise information about the frequency distribution of the discrepancy between the estimated input and its expectation .
Results can be useful in checking the validity of certain prior assumptions and could , for instance , be applied in recovering the luminosity distribution of the Milky Way .
Finally a new method of input reconstruction in irregular cases will be developed using wavelets with potential application to image reconstruction .
This material synthesis and processing project is focused on next generation magnetic materials .
Of primary importance is the preparation and characterization of high anisotropy CoPt and FePt nanoparticles .
The particles will be prepared by a cluster gun assembly equipped with a special heat-treating stage , required to transform their structure from the fcc phase to the high anisotropy fct phase .
Specially prepared substrates will also be used to assemble these nanoscale particles into ordered arrays .
The properties of the particles and their arrays will be investigated as candidate media for high-density magnetic recording .
The project will provide one post-doctoral associate with cutting edge training and education in magnetism and materials science .
The project is co-funded between the Metals Program and the Condensed Matter Physics Program.This material synthesis and processing project is focused on next generation magnetic materials .
As a magnetic particle is continually reduced in size to the nanometer regime , it becomes susceptible to temperature effects that can cause its magnetization to fluctuate in different directions .
It is no longer possible to store information in the particle 's magnetization orientation .
These issues are among the most important limits to how dense information can be stored on hard disk drives .
The objective of this research is to develop recording media that will function at room temperature while using particles of sizes below one millionth of an inch .
The materials are alloys or compounds of cobalt , platinum and iron .
The project will provide one post-doctoral associate with cutting edge training and education in magnetism and materials science .
The project is co-funded between the Metals Program and the Condensed Matter Physics Program .
This proposal requests support for a group at the University of Cincinnati for a program of research and education in experimental elementary particle physics based on the BaBar experiment at the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center ( SLAC ) .
They are also completing the analysis of a hadronic charm production experiment E791 at Fermilab.The main aim of BaBar is to study the origin of particle-antiparticle asymmetry ( CP violation ) as seen in the decays of neutral B mesons ( B0s ) and their antiparticles .
The Standard Model of elementary particle interactions predicts such CP asymmetries .
The BaBar experiment is designed to detect many of the B decay modes and thus to study the time-dependence of CP violation .
In addition to the analysis contributions , the group is also involved with the operations and software development of the DIRC ( Detector of Internally Reflected Cherenkov radiation ) .
0203502KnoxThis award to University of California at San Diego will provide instrumentation for oceanographic research for use by the Oceanographic Data Facility of Scripps Institution of Oceanography , as well as specific instruments for use on the four research vessels operated by the institution , R/Vs Revelle , Melville , New Horizon and Sproul .
All four of these research vessels are operated by the university as part of the University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System research fleet .
Specific instrumentation to be acquired includes a GPS unit for vessel attitude monitoring , a thermosalinograph , sixteen computers for shipboard use , two new CTD ( conductivity-temperature-depth ) systems with carousels for water sampling , three conductivity/temperature/pump sets for use with the CTDs , three new oxygen sensors , upgrades for autotitrator systems , and new cable and fairing for the towed , undulating vehicle system .
The shared-use instrumentation supported here will assist marine scientists conduct studies worldwide on SIO and other research vessels during 2002 and future years .
*** Interest in a class of new class of liquid crystal materials referred to as banana liquid crystals is presently very high among the chemistry , physics and liquid crystal device community .
A workshop to be held in the Fall of 2002 will be hosted by the Ferroelectric Liquid Crystal Materials Research Center , an NSF MRSEC at the University of Colorado at Boulder to address important and timely research issues that have recently emerged .
This will include discussing and agreeing on a much needed classification system to replace the existing convention based on order of discovery .
The funds will be used to assist junior faculty , post-docs , and graduate students to attend and present their own research .
The liquid crystal community continues to have direct impact on education and the development of new materials for technological advances of high significance to society .
The latter include the development of novel electro optic devices of high commercial interest .
This award provides funding for a three-year Combined Research-Curriculum Development ( CRCD ) program , entitled Towards a New Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering Curriculum , at the University of Notre Dame , under the direction of Dr. Agnes E. Ostafin .
The overall objective of this project is to develop curricular material ( text , web and laboratory ) that will demonstrate how to integrate molecular and cellular biology into chemical engineering , in the same way as chemistry has traditionally been integrated , to produce Chemical and Biomolecular Engineers .
0203585CveticThis three-year award for US-Spain collaboration on particle physics of implications of M-theory involves Mirjam Cvetic and his students of the University of Pennsylvania and Luis Ibanez and Angel Uranga at the Universidad Autonoma of Madrid , in Spain .
The purpose of the project is to investigate the fundamental aspects of strings and branes , as well as the powerful applications of string theory to particle phenomenology , astrophysics , and cosmology .
The US researchers and Spanish researchers bring to this collaboration expertise in string model building and string phenomenology .
The Penn theory group has also begun to broaden the scope of string phenomenology to astrophysical and cosmological issues .
The objectives of the joint project are to bring the state of the art of model building in new regimes of M theory to the next level .
Abstract0203143 ( B.F. Spencer , Univ .
Notre Dame ) This project provides support for a joint US-Europe Seminar/Workshop in Sensors and Smart Structures Technology in April 2002 in Somma Lombardo , Italy..
The objective of this project is to establish a common framework for expanded future joint research through mutual learning in the emerging subject areas between US and Europe.In the last few years , significant progress has been made in the area of sensingtechnology and structural health monitoring/condition assessment in the US and Europe.Innovative concepts involving new hardware , algorithms , and software , as well asvibration control have been proposed .
There have also been several full scale trialimplementations of densely sensor instrumented infrastructures and health monitoringsystems , as well as case studies on bridges in Europe and the US .
There is much can be learned from the European experts and vice versa , especially in the area ofexperimental verification on small , medium , large and full scale projects .
The program will consist of four seminar sessions on the theme topics of ( 1 ) innovative sensing hardware , ( 2 ) advances in wireless technology , ( 3 ) damage detection/characterization and condition assessment methodology , and ( 4 ) case studies and experimental verification on international testbeds .
Then four workshopsessions will follow to summarize the status of the sensors and smart structures technology in these topics , to identify the outstanding research issues , and to formulate an action plan with recommendations for development and implementation through possible collaborative research projects and sharing of scientific data .
A final report of the workshop will be prepared and made available to the research and practitioner community through normal distribution means and also through Internet for wider information dissemination .
The Mathematical Association of America ( MAA ) proposes to investigate the feasibility of developing an online magazine in the history of mathematics and its use in teaching , with a target audience of grades 9-14 teachers of mathematics .
The online magazine , a new component of the NSF-funded Mathematical Sciences Digital Library , is intended to be a living , growing resource , and will incorporate features such as hyperlinks and interactive graphics .
A range of materials will be included in the magazine including expository articles , translations of original sources , historical problems , a mathematical calendar , reviews of books and websites , teaching materials and translations of articles previously published in other languages .
ABSTRACT 0203315Ronald GoldmanWilliam Marsh Rice UResultants have many applications in Computational Science and Engineering .
They are a powerful tool for determining whether or not a system of polynomial equations have a common root for solving for the common roots when they exist .
Resultants are currently employed to compute intersections of rational curves and surfaces , to solve inverse kinematics problems , and to analyze dynamic systems .
Robotics , Computer vision , Comptuer Graphics , Solid Modeling , and Computer Aided Geometric Design all utilize resultants .
AbstractDMS-0203676 & 0203724PIs Jiang/RaoThis research involves development of model selection procedures for linear and generalized linear mixed models .
The focus of this research will be on studying asymptotic properties and finite sample performance of the procedures , which will include comparisons to commonly used ad hoc methods .
The research will also develop applications of the selection methodology to selecting factors in longitudinal data , genetic screening of genes related to quantitative traits of interest , and to model selection in small area estimation problems from surveys .
In addition , the methods developed will be made accessible through the development of freely available software .
The research will also improve work recently completed by the investigators where the conditions for consistent factor selection in linear mixed models were established .
These improvements will include developing a more efficient method for linear mixed model selection , and studying some adaptive procedures .
Linear and generalized linear mixed models are important classes of models which allow relaxation of standard assumptions like independence or homogeneity of variances of observations , and take into account more complicated data structures in quite general ways .
Typical applications include repeated measurements made on a patient over time or screening of candidate genes that might be related to a quantitative trait of interest .
Selecting which factors should or should not be in the model can be of importance for model inference and predictions , yet little if anything has been developed to formally study this problem .
This research attempts to fill this important gap in the field of developing new procedures for correct factor selection from a theoretical perspective , and evaluating real-world performance via extensive simulations .
Another important component of this research is to apply it in a variety of real-world settings including longitudinal data , genetic screening , and small area estimation in survey sampling .
Statistical methods will be developed to sharply improve time-resolution for the recently proposed technique of functional magnetic resonance imaging ( fMRI ) .
The objective of the project is to improve the time-resolution of fMRI by sampling only a small fraction of the Fourier transform of the spin density , and using a prolate wavelet filter to approximately obtain an integral representing the total activity of the difference in susceptibility between task and pre-task , over various regions of interest in the brain at successive time -points .
The cost for this is a decrease in spatial resolution .
This space/time trade-off allows us to obtain , at high-time resolution , the total activity in specified regions of the brain , believed to process the specific stimulus/task , to learn or verify where the brain function takes place .
Furthermore , the proposed methodologies is believed to be applicable to other types of MRI studies , especially magnetic resonance spectroscopy.The proposal focuses on developing statistical methods and related theory for fast functional magnetic resonance ( fMRI ) , to sharply improve the time resolution of present techniques via 3-dimensional sampling .
The principal investigators and their collaborators have conducted a fMRI imaging experiment to answer the feasibility question .
The results based on this small experiment are quite encouraging .
Further experiments will conducted to confirm the preliminary results and improve upon technology .
Fast fMRI is expected to have profound and far-reaching consequences in the understanding of brain function , a problem of central scientific interest at the present time EIA-0203085Fountain , Jane Harvard UniversityDeveloping a Basic Research Program for Digital GovernmentThis workshop grant is intended to develop a long-term , basic research agenda for Digital Government research in the areas of social and political sciences .
Attendees will include Computer/Information scientists , social scientists , and government executives .
The workshop will be developed and managed by Harvard 's John F. Kennedy School of government .
0203823Zheng Let [ x ( t ) , 0 < t < T ] be a realized path of a diffusion process with an unknown multi-dimensional parameter u in its coefficients .
The Principle Investigator and his students are interested in estimating the real value of u .
They discovered that they can define a Maximum Likelihood Estimator U of the unknown u even if u appeared in the diffusion coefficient .
They are going to find the rate of convergence of U to the true parameter u under reasonable assumptions when the observation time is relatively long enough .
Since in the real applications , x ( t ) can be only recorded at discrete time spots , they are particularly interested in the problems of error estimates related to discretizations of their models .
The Principle Investigator and his students ' research has its interests in the real applications .
There are many examples of parameter estimates of diffusion processes in the applications .
For example , it may be related to the trace of a military missile , or the price of a stock .
All those models contain some unknown parameters .
Moreover , any observation of the real path contains errors .
Assuming that the observation error can be only bounded by a constant c , then no matter how one increases the computation steps in the time discretization method , the error of the estimate can not be significantly reduced beyond some number .
In other words , the Principle Investigator and his students will find out the minimum steps needed for a computer to get enough accurate result when an observation error is recognized .
This study has its potential military and financial applications .
The research project is focused on application of the Lax Pairand the Riemann-Hilbert Method to the solution of scattering problems in inhomogeneous geomaterials .
This approach is based on a new version of the Inverse Scattering Transform suggested recently by A. Fokas for studying boundary problems for linear and integrablenonlinear PDEs .
Topics of investigation include ( i ) analysis ofthe Riemann-Hilbert problem on the elliptic curve related to the vector Lax pair of the elastodynamic equation ; ( ii ) explicit evaluation of scattering coefficients of Raylegh wave in a quarter-space and a corner ; ( iii ) the Riemann-Hilbert approach to scattering of elasticsurface wave at a vertical interface of two homogeneous quarter-spaces.The analysis of seismic waves is the major source of informationabout the Earth internal structure and its sesmicity .
The elastodynamic equation serves as a basic mathematical model for studing diffraction and scattering of seismic waves on deep fault zone areas and other inhomogeneitiesin the Earth Crust and Upper Mantle .
The research program indicated abovewould allow to make a considerable progress in solving some of the longstanding problems related to realistic geometry of seismic zones .
Moreover , theimportant nature of the method developed in the project is that it can be also appliedto various nonlinear versions of the elastodynamic equation .
During thelast decades it has been discovered that nonlinearity of the Earth materialsmay be responsible for some peculiar characteristics of the wavefield , hencethe research project would provide an analytic tool for studingthese completely new kind of seismic phenemena as well .
The conceptual interpretation of forest community establishment and maintenance in tropical forests is heavily influenced by the theoretical concepts of succession and gap dynamics .
While these concepts are appropriate to upland forests we suggest that they are inappropriate to describe plant community dynamics for Amazon floodplain forests .
On the floodplain seasonal inundation is the strongest mechanism influencing the ecological processes that maintain the landscape heterogeneity and complexity so characteristic of this environment .
Floodwaters act most strongly on the edges of landscape elements-rivers , lakes , levees-where transitions in vegetation occur .
This doctoral dissertation research project will provide an alternative conceptual interpretation of forest community dynamics on the Amazon floodplain which is based on the ecological functions of edges .
Riverine farmers who take advantage of the rich alluvial floodplain soils also create edges in their small-scale agriculture production systems .
Their production and resource management technologies also influence the development of forest communities .
The focus of this research is on a single tree species native to varzea forests -- Calycophyllum spruceanum , a tremendous tree in the coffee family -- but broadly treats the composition and dynamics of floodplain forest environments .
Research conducted at the landscape level combined with studies on the autecology of C. spruceanum will show how the distribution and population dynamics of this tree species are influenced by the fluvial dynamics acting on edges and by land use practices of varzea residents .
Research will be conducted in several Peruvian and Brazilian Amazon floodplain forests and riverine villages .
The project employs methodologies at both the landscape and field scales including participant-observation techniques , interviews with local farmers , land use surveys , vegetation inventories of agricultural fields and forests , and experimentation .
The stand inventory data will be analyzed using Principal Components Analysis ( PCA ) .
A multivariable analysis will be employed to test the relationship of flood duration , light levels , and edge type to the establishment and growth of seedlings in fields , fallows , and forests .
The outcome of this study will include an ecological and management analysis of the woody component of production systems developed by varzea residents and a monograph on the ecology of an important tree species native to the varzea .
Amazon flooded forests provide critical habitat for fish and other animals and plants specially adapted to long periods of seasonally flooding .
The maintenance of tree cover is critical for the conservation in this fragile environment which absorbs the floodwaters of the mighty Amazon River and its major tributaries over a period of four to six months annually .
Despite its ecological and conservation importance , the Amazon flooded forest environment and the production systems of its inhabitants are not fully understood .
To address the information gap this doctoral dissertation research project will focus on the natural and social processes that control the regeneration , establishment , and growth of tree species in the natural forests and landholdings of farmers .
Non-indigenous riverine farmers , who occupy and steward these forests , are also often overlooked in development and conservation agendas .
A second goal of this research project is to identify and promote their traditional knowledge and local technologies that maintain tree cover in this critical environment .
The results of this project will be applicable to development and conservation programs specific to floodplain environments throughout Amazonia .
As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award , this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research career .
The national need for improving the security of the electric power networks and efficiently has been articulated by several government policies including President Bush 's energy policy that calls for the creation of a national energy grid , and the elimination of regulatory provisions that limit investment in transmission and curtail power generation.This requires a new dynamic architecture that can sustain vulnerabilities under different perturbations to the system while remaining stable , secure and cost-effective .
The Center for Energy Systems and Controls at Howard University ( CESaC ) will develop a multidisciplinary perspective , to attain an integrated sustainable scalable and survivable power system in the context of a deregulated US market system .
A multi-layered network inculcating system technology , financial network within the context of various market structures and environmental soundness will employ modem control and optimization techniques .
It will also invoke risk assessment strategies in constructing , the architecture thereby generating and delivering power efficiently at minimum cost without sacrificing environmental and reliability standards.Proposed research and educational activities will increase the participation of under represented groups across disciplines as a workforce and intellectual leaders to address the complex secured networks of the future .
A system simulator will be designed and developed to study various test beds based on the Navy challenge problem and civilian test bed system provided by utility companies that CESaC has worked with in the past.Results of the education pedagogy , including the assessment of the learning outcomes will be disseminated via cdrom , and distance learning information system technologies .
SeaMaven , a Prototype Virtual Learning EnvironmentThe Georgia Tech Research Institute ( GTRI ) is collaborating with the Skidaway Institute of Oceanography ( SkIO ) in a two-year pilot project to develop SeaMaven , a prototype Virtual Learning Environment for studying the marine ecosystem .
SeaMaven enables middle school age science students to actively engage in collaborative learning in the environmental sciences through the innovative use of telecommunications technologies .
Students access an interactive Web site and take atmospheric and hydrology measurements of the ecosystem off the Georgia/South Carolina coast in near real-time .
The project provides a virtual tour of a 5700 square kilometer area of the continental shelf with access to a number of platform-based sensor stations for monitoring environmental parameters .
The interactive online sensor displays give students the opportunity to record measurements , compare data , and generate hypotheses based on their observations .
Working alone or in groups , students create their own science projects to monitor ocean-atmosphere interactions over a period of weeks , months , or years .
The Web site also enables electronic discussion forums on the materials and ideas generated by the experience , and interaction with the scientists for answering questions , hypothesis posing and testing , and determining how the project is proceeding .
0224546YauThis is a U.S.-Hong Kong joint workshop proposal on Recent Developments in Complex Variables , Cauchy Riemann Geometry and Complex Algebraic Geometry submitted by Dr. Stephen Yau , University of Illinois and Dr. Ngaiming Mok , Hong Kong University .
The meeting will be held at Hong Kong University , May 12-16 , 2003 .
The conference covers an important topic in mathematics , with the attendance of top level of researchers from the U.S. , Hong Kong and China .
With the inclusion of junior scientists from the U.S. , this conference could provide an important venue for these U.S. scientists to meet with their colleagues from East Asia .
ABSTRACTOCE-0224374Under this award , the American Institute of Biological Sciences will continue its management of the Dissertation Symposia on Chemical Oceanography ( DISCO ) , which it has run under joint NSF/ONR/NOAA sponsorship since 1978 .
From the time of its inception twenty-four years ago , the objectives of DISCO have been ( 1 ) to bring together in a common forum recent doctoral recipients in chemical oceanography to discuss their cutting-edge dissertation research and ( 2 ) to encourage the formation of long-term scientific collaborative relationships early in their professional lives .
DISCO has been a resounding success -- so much so that the enthusiastic publicity generated in the academic community led to DISCO becoming the de facto gold standard that led to the organization of other DISCO-like dissertation symposia in other branches of the earth sciences .
Our study investigates landscape change and plague occurrence in the black-tailed prairie dog and associated species , to understand the human health and ecological risks of landscape alteration and disease introduction .
Black-tailed prairie dogs have been considered a 'keystone ' species of short-grass prairie ecosystems in the western US .
The abundance and distribution of prairie dogs may influence the occurrence of many native plant and animal species .
Blood diseases like plague spread through contact between black-tailed prairie dogs and co-occurring alternate mammalian hosts .
Through a combination of field data collection , laboratory studies , and computer simulation modeling , we will examine ecological relationships of hosts , vectors , and pathogens at the local , landscape , and regional scales.Because our study system includes landscape change and recent disease introduction , it is representative of problems faced by many ecosystems as habitat fragmentation and disease transport increase worldwide .
By focusing on this host-vector-disease system we will isolate anthropogenic effects that influence disease emergence and resurgence .
By carefully examining the modes and scales of contact within this complex community , we hope to discover the potential for ecological and epidemiological keystone effects of prairie dogs .
This discovery will elucidate whether anthropogenic effects on ecological systems can have predictable consequences for disease transmission and dynamics .
0224929ThadhaniThis award supports a three-year collaborative international research experience program for faculty , graduate students , undergraduate students and science teachers to conduct research in the multi-disciplinary field of materials science and engineering at sites in Japan , Korea , China and Hong Kong .
The principal investigator for the project is Naresh Thadhani at Georgia Tech in Atlanta .
Five faculty/student/teacher groups will be participating each year .
The teachers will be selected from Atlanta area high schools .
The program will provide the opportunity for students to experience hands-on participation in materials research for up to eight weeks during the summer months .
The research projects will be designed in a manner that allows promotion of research interactions between faculty from both the U.S. and the East Asian countries while ensuring that there are specific benefits for each of the team members in addition to their gaining an international research experience .
The graduate students will be able to enhance the quality and/or scope of their thesis work while also learning to be mentors .
The undergraduate students will gain a sense of what graduate research is about , and an international perspective to the field of research that they may eventually become interested in .
The teacher participants will become knowledgeable with the culture of baccalaureate education in East Asian countries and also learn about the field of materials science and engineering .
This award is made under NSF 's AWARE ( American Workforce and Research and Education ) program .
The challenges of the twenty-first century require a new cadre of graduates in science and engineering who are broadly educated and are ready to effectively contribute to difficult technological problems requiring a multi-disciplinary , teamed , and global approach .
This materials education project , with an underlying theme of structure and properties correlation across length scales , is of vital importance to users as well as developers of materials .
Recent developments in quantitative microstructural characterization techniques , approaches for real-time testing of properties , and novel methods for synthesizing and processing materials , allowing microstructural control , provide a unique opportunity to cost-effectively design materials with desired electronic , magnetic , mechanical and optical properties .
In addition advancements in computer technology make it possible to model and simulate process conditions and allow predictions and simulations of structures that are directly linked to properties .
The participants will undertake studies of various materials and their applications , focusing on the common theme of linking and correlating material properties with structure across nano- , meso- , micro- and macro-length scales .
Development of a Field-Based Geochemistry Course in the Dallas-Fort Worth MetroplexThis project develops a national model for a field and laboratory based coursein geochemistry at the undergraduate ( and graduate ) levels .
Geosciences majors at the University of Texas at Dallas enrolled in Geochemistry ( a required course for B.Sc.majors ) will spend a total of 10 days in the field working from a pontoon boat on LakeTexoma , a large impoundment north of the Dallas-Fort Worth ( DFW ) metroplex .
Duringthe field exercises students will collect data and samples for analysis in the ICP analyticalfacility ( inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer and optical emission spectrometerinstruments ) .
The purpose of the field and laboratory work is to incorporate Problem-Based Learning ( PBL ) methods into geochemistry instruction .
The incorporation of thefield work into the geochemistry course work is intended to stimulate students interest ingeochemistry , provide hands-on experience with state-of-the-art sampling and analyticalmethodologies , and mesh research with learning to foster student understanding of realworld problems .
The study area , Lake Texoma receives input from two major river systems , the Red River and the Washita River .
The Red River drains west Texas and Oklahoma and as a result typically has elevated salinity ( typically 1200 - 2000 mg/L total dissolved solids , TDS , where it enters the lake and > 12,000 mg/L TDS in some of the headwater reaches ) , making the Red River one of the saltiest major rivers in the world .
In contrast , the Washita River drains west-central Oklahoma and is much fresher ( typically < 500 mg/L TDS ) .
Mixing between these two rivers results in horizontal chemical gradients in addition to vertical chemical gradients that occur during development of a summer thermocline .
Large deltas are forming where both the Red and Washita rivers enter Lake Texoma , as a result of elevated suspended loads .
This dynamic geochemical and sedimentological system is therefore ideal for students to develop hypotheses , collect the necessary data to test those hypotheses and then communicate the results as term papers and oral presentations .
Following the semester-length course , a graduate student and two undergraduates will be involved in sampling the lake through the summer to track geochemical changes as the thermocline develops .
After year one of the project , the course will be assessed by two external experts in geology and pedagogy .
Their recommendations will be incorporated to improve the course for year two .
Education Aquanauts Exploration-Based Interdisciplinary Science Skills EnhancementDuring the last decade , more than half a dozen animal species have invaded the upper Great Lakes , some of them causing unequivocal and perhaps cataclysmic alterations in large lake ecosystems .
All have established themselves in terms of having reproductively successful populations , but they are recent enough in some cases to have as-yet limited ranges .
While both ecologically- and economically massive alterations in local and global habitats are occurring , the younger K-12 and even undergraduate population of the region is only slowly becoming aware of large water bodies including Lake Michigan .
This program provides immersion science learning for teachers of primarily middle school students produces curriculum modules for use in in-school hands-on learning activities .
The focus of the effort is the biological community of Green Can Reef , a local spawning reef at the heart ( e.g. , zebra mussels , perch recruitment ) and also the edge ( e.g. , goby , amphipod decline ) of invasive species influences .
Specific objectives are to ( 1 ) expand teacher awareness of exotic species occurrence and activities in local waters ; ( 2 ) engage teachers in short , intense hands-on workshops using modern-day tools including Remotely Operated Vehicles ( ROVs ) and analytical instrumentation to test specific , tractable hypotheses ; ( 3 ) provide educators with resources to access current environmental research activities and results in their own region ; and ( 4 ) develop educator-produced , scientist-assisted curriculum modules offering experimental , hypothesis-testing , hands-on research activities for students and public learners using locally-relevant subjects .
The entire sequence is repeated such that observations span a period of systematic change , for example during spring bloom conditions or across thermal ( de ) stratification regimes .
At the conclusion of the effort , each teacher will develop a single class-period activity that incorporates some aspect of their experience ( data , concepts , underwater video ) , nurtured by active research scientists experienced in teacher enhancement programs .
AbstractA grant has been awarded to the Organization for Tropical Studies ( OTS ) at Duke University , under the direction of PI Dr. Gary Hartshorn to improve the research facilities at OTS ' Palo Verde Biological Station in Costa Rica .
OTS is a nonprofit consortium of 65 universities and research institutions from the United States , Latin America , Australia , Canada and South Africa .
Founded in 1963 , OTS ' mission is to provide leadership in education , research and the responsible use of natural resources in the tropics .
OTS has operated the Palo Verde Biological station since 1971.Located in lowland , monsoonally dry forest of Guanacaste Province , Costa Rica , OTS ' Palo Verde station is in the heart of Palo Verde National Park that protects one of the largest remnants of tropical dry forest in Mesoamerica .
At Palo Verde , OTS works in cooperation with governmental and partner-organizations on scientific issues of training , conservation , environmental education , wetlands restoration and natural resources management .
Over the past decade the demand to use Palo Verde by OTS and non-OTS education groups has almost doubled , while research use continues to increase .
The facilities at Palo Verde are inadequate to meet the physical needs for student and researcher uses , such as laboratory and lecture space , offices and housing .
OTS will use NSF funds to build a new facility to house the station director and staff ; construct a four ? unit cabin to house up to eight researchers ; construct a new boardwalk into the marsh ; and purchase a new generator to provide a back-up power source.The broad goals of this project are toAchieve OTS ' long-term strategic goal of developing the Palo Verde Biological Station as a center of excellence in tropical dry forest ecology and wetlands management .
Modernize the Palo Verde Biological Station to improve its education , research and conservation biology capabilities.To stimulate and support the development and dissemination of research in tropical dry forest ecology .
The full implementation of this project will enable OTS to continue to build its education program at Palo Verde , assist scientists in achieving the region 's vast research potential , and work with researchers on wetlands protection at a time when agricultural growth in the lower Tempisque river basin is having a major impact on Palo Verde National Park .
This award provides partial support for renovation of the seawater system at the University of Texas - Pan American Coastal Studies Laboratory ( CSL ) on South Padre Island , Texas .
The CSL supports research and educational activities of the University , and provides a variety of public education activities focused on marine life and related topics .
The CSL is currently hampered in fulfilling this mission by the limited capabilities of its seawater system .
These limits are imposed by the original design of the system , deterioration of the intake and discharge lines , and the aging of other equipment .
The renovated system will have dual intake lines and pumps , sand-filtration , new plumbing for filtered water , and twin discharge lines .
The system will support research on marine algae , seagrasses , and small marine animals .
In addition to research , the seawater system will support general lab use , university and public outreach courses , and an aquarium intended for public displays .
EIA 02-24428Bianchini , RicardKremer , UlrichRutgers University New Brunswick Title CISE RR Infrastructure for Power-Aware Server Clusters This proposal , investigating the power , energy , performance , and functionality issues and trade-offs involved in cluster environments , aims at acquiring equipment for research on power aware clusters of servers .
The bulk of the infrastructure consists of a cluster of blade servers .
Since blade servers consume less power and allow finer control of power states than traditional servers , they are considered ideal for power and energy conservation research .
The infrastructure supports two research studies inStrategies for conserving power and energy in cluster-based Internet servers , such as high-capacity WWW , database , or file serversComputation and data servers in the context of a tamper-resistant and fault-tolerant sensor network.The former project involves servers that support most WWW data/hosting centers , Internet companies , and a large number of teaching and research institutions , but consume significant amounts of power and energy .
Conserving these resources is critical to reduce the installation and operation costs of these clusters .
Conserving power and energy without degrading performance ( or at least without degrading excessively ) constitutes the challenge .
The cluster blades proposed enable designs and experiments with techniques that can schedule the demand for resources , permitting transitioning from active to low-power model without relevant performance penalty .
The project experiments with heterogeneous servers comprising combination of blades and traditional , power-hungry servers .
The latter project designs the sensor network to identify , monitor , and track objects or subjects within a physical space .
This overall space is divided into subspaces , where each subspace has its own server ( or small cluster of servers ) , and all servers are connected via a network .
The design allows local and global processing and evaluation of sensor data .
Again , energy efficiency becomes crucial in this context because the servers need to be able to survive power failures for extended periods of time and still provide critical services .
The cluster of blades enables the study of energy behavior of the critical server tasks in this environment , as well as experiment with techniques that can reduce the energy consumption of these tasks without noticeably degrading their performance and functionality.On the educational side , the blades and the systems will be exploited developing operating systems , distributed computing , and compiler courses .
Power and energy consumption , as well as performance , design , implementation , and evaluation guidelines will be promoted .
Developing Suitcase Lessons in Oceanography in concert with the FOSS-based K-6 Science Curriculum Currently in Use in a Tri-County EducationalService DistrictThree counties in Oregon are currently involved in improving science education in schools by changing the education paradigm from teaching-centered to learning-centered via inquiry-based hands-on curricula .
It is based on a Science-Teacher Partnership Program ( SEPS ) , in which Full Option Science Systems ( FOSS ) have been adopted for each grade level from K-6 , and partnerships have been established to help teachers provide a quality science education for all students .
The program is advised by a panel composed of teachers , scientists and administrators with experience and/or interest in hands-on science .
The SEPS program has been successful not only in enhancing the young students interest and knowledge of science , but has also had a positive impact by increasing younger students awareness of opportunities and of careers made possible by higher education .
However , there is no ocean science component in the curriculum .
The objective of this project is to address that deficiency .
The project will generate and test the concept of using Suitcase Lessons in Oceanography , in concert with ongoing curriculum , to infuse ocean science into K-6 science education in the Linn-Benton-Lincoln Educational Service District ( ESD ) .
A complete portable module ( Suitcase Lesson ) will be created which will allow any faculty member to introduce fundamental science concepts of ocean science to K-6 students .
This approach aims at directly addressing NSES goals of science literacy for all ; real understanding of scientific processes ; and development of a desire for science learning throughout life .
In addition it addresses the current need of integrating ocean sciences in a life-long educational program aimed at promoting a basic understanding of the oceans and their relevance to everyday life .
ResearchProduct design methodology is a mechanism that permits the synthesis of new materials with specifically tailored properties .
Two challenges in computational molecular design are ( 1 ) the ability to predict the physical and chemical properties of a given molecule and ( 2 ) the ability to solve the large optimization problem which arises from the search for the best molecule for a given application .
Research in molecular characterization can predict many physical and chemical properties to a reasonable accuracy for common molecules .
A missing technology is a set of parallel algorithms which can efficiently solve the large mixed-integer optimization problems using parallel computing hardware .
This project focuses the application of tabu search , a stochastic technique for the solution of such optimization problems , to the molecular design of novel polymers.Tabu search uses a neighborhood search algorithm which is efficient at searching the entire solution space , thus enabling globally optimal solutions to be found within a reasonable time .
These algorithms are amenable to parallelization since each member of a solution set can be updated independently .
As part of this project , the PIs plan to develop a parallel implementation suitable for use on clusters of workstations .
The work will focus on the development of improvements to handle the types of constraint that occur when predicting the physical properties of polymers , and the application of these improvements within a parallel implementation for use on clusters of multiprocessor workstations.Impact-Tailor-made molecules have huge potential in the chemical process industries .
-This Small Grant for exploratory research will permit two young PIs to venture into a totally new research area for them .
-This collaborative project between an undergraduate institution , Rose-Hulman , and the University of Kansas , will provide opportunities to undergraduates to be involved in research otherwise not open to them .
N/A EIA 02-24449Dinda , Peter A.Banerjee , Prithviraj ; Kao , Ming-YangNorthwestern UniversityCISE RR Collaborative Research on Wide-Area Network Computing Using Virtual MachinesThis collaborative research project ( with Fortes at University of Florida , proposal 02-24442 ) , requiring a wide-area test bed that enables experimentation with , access to , and running of applications on unique resources , requests PC clusters , an IBM server , and other ancillary hardware for projects in1 .
Distributed grid computing and information processing systems using virtualization technologies and2 .
Information grids with real users and research applications requiring capabilities enabled by virtual machines ( VMs ) .Deploying a distributed system based on clusters connected by local , metropolitan , and wide area networks , the work aims to provide a virtual computing and data storage interface to clients that access resources on the underlying information grid .
The test bed includes the following defining features.1 .
Virtualization capabilities , i.e. , the ability to instantiate independent logical machines that can be multiplexed on physical processors ( or fractions of them ) , storage and network I/O channels , and can use distinct operating systems ; 2 .
Wide-area distribution , i.e. , Internet-linked test bed components in independently-administered geographically-apart network domains ; 3 .
Scalable capacity for both scientific computing and information processing ; and4 .
Heterogeneity.Interrelated projects enabled by the test bed towards the goal of developing VM-based middleware for grid computing include virtualized end resources , monitoring and prediction , interactive computing , virtual file systems , data management , cycle selling , and security .
Information grids and web portals for use of CAD tools are also enabled by the infrastructure for dissemination of collaborative research results and data , and for digital government services .
From the availability of the portals and grid-computing resources benefits are expected in brain-machine interfaces , biologically-inspired nanocomputing , auction-based computing , distributed knowledge applications , medical imaging and data archiving , light-scattering spectroscopy , and mixed non-linear optimization .
Collaborations include the Sigmicro microarchitecture center , NETCARE and the Purdue-hosted Nanohub ( enabling users to run tools for computer architecture and parallel computing , and nanoelectrnics ) .
The project impacts some minority serving institutions such as Chicago State and Florida A & M Universities and enables a testbed for a transnational digital government projects involving Carnegie Mellon University , University of Belize , University of Colorado , University of Florida , University of Massachusetts , and Pontificia Universidad Catolica Madre y Maestra of the Dominican Republic .
0224957PonganisThis project will investigate the effects of the iceberg , B-15 , on the emperorpenguin population at Cape Crozier .
The population of this southernmost of emperorpenguin colonies , although sometimes fluctuating radically , had steadily grown in pastyears , with as many as 1200 chicks counted .
This probably represented an adultpopulation of 2400-3000 birds .
However , in 2001 , after B-15 ground into the CapeCrozier area during the winter breeding period , no live emperor chicks were found .
Thecolony had disappeared .
The goal of this project is to determine if the colony will re-establish itself at Cape Crozier or relocate nearby to a different site .
If the colonyreestablishes at Cape Crozier , we will estimate the previous year 's loss with a census ofthe chicks present this year .
The destruction of the colony site by the iceberg in 2001represents a natural experiment to examine the resilience of breeding emperors to shortterm disasters .
Broader impacts of this study are related to the historical importance andworldwide interest in this colony as it was the first emperor colony discovered , and hasprobably the longest census record of any penguin colony .
EIA 0224465Shankar , NatarajanStickel , Mark E.SRI International Title CISE RR QPQ An Open Source Deductive Software Repository This project , establishing a deductive software repository , aims at making software more available , reliable , durable , higher quality , uniform .
Deductive software consists of symbolic routines for logical manipulations including decision procedures , solvers , rewriters , model checkers , and theorem provers .
It serves as the semantic foundation for many scientific and engineering applications in areas such as hardware and software verification , program synthesis and analysis , data- and knowledge-based systems , artificial intelligence , linguistics , and e-commerce .
This work outlines an initiative for deductive software components called QPQ ( quid pro quo ) as a marketplace for publishing , exchanging , and refining deductive software components .
The refereed publication and distribution of such scientific software components in open source often yields higher quality , greater visibility , and accelerated productivity .
Efficient implementation of deductive algorithms , an extremely complex and delicate task , requires serious investment in basic infrastructure such as concrete and abstract syntax , syntactic tools ( parsers , typecheckers , pretty-printer ) , primitive operations ( substitution , matching , unification , normalization ) , and advanced operations ( constraint satisfaction , forward and backward chaining , rewriting , simplification , decision procedures , induction methods ) .
Potential impacts include availability , reliability , quality , durability , productivity , visibility , uniformity , synergy , serendipity , and history .
The following principles will be employed in running the repository authenticity , uniqueness , access , relevance , format , quality and version control , and academic credit .
QPQ is already recognized as a valuable resource for research and education in deductive software .
With its role in facilitating the semantic web and through other applications of logico-symbolic computing , the QPQ repository might become crucial to society .
This proposal was received in response to the NSF Spin Electronics for the 2fl Century Initiative , Program Solicitation NSF 02-036 .
The proposal focuses on investigation of techniques to locally induce , control , and detect electron spin in semiconductor microstructures by using properly located electrostatic gate voltages .
Electrostatic gates are easily defined on a submicron scale and should provide switching and manipulations of spin currents .
A variety of approaches to this goal will be pursued , including ( i ) gate-programmable nuclear polarization applied to single and double quantum dots , and the transfer of nuclear spin from dot to dot , ( ii ) gate-controlled spin-polarization in high-mobility GaAs/AlAs epitaxial layers ; and ( iii ) electron-spin-resonance { ESR ) measurements in AlAs.Combining state-of-the-art fabrication technology , careful measurements , and theoretical analysis , the proposed research is highly interdisciplinary .
It relies on expertise of three experimentalists and one theorist in engineering and physics .
It also entails the full participation of graduate and undergraduate students , who will gain invaluable experience and knowledge in cutting edge materials science and engineering , with a focus on the emerging and potentially rewarding field of spin electronics.The work will be centered at Princeton University with one investigator at Harvard University .
Existing facilities at Princeton and Harvard will be adequate to carry out all the proposed work .
The majority of requested funding will be used to support graduate students .
Workshops at Princeton are planned to insure a focused research effort and to enhance interaction among students working on the common research goals .
The existing Industrial Research Institute/Center for Innovation Management Studies ( IRI/CIMS ) Annual R & D Survey , which supports research on management of technological innovation , will continue to be performed .
The survey instrument will be augmented so that data can be collected on variables that are uniquely relevant to firms and business units operating in dynamic and technology intensive business sectors such as software , defense/aerospace , and telecommunications .
Coverage will be increased to seek answers to important questions about the contribution of R & D to innovation outcomes , such as product and process cost reductions and revenue enhancements .
Finally , the breadth of the Annual Survey sample will be expanded to include firms that may not be members of the Industrial Research Institute ( IRI ) , but whose R & D activities are of significant economic interest and importance .
In addition , the Management Practices Survey ( MPS ) , which was last conducted in 1996 , will be repeated .
The MPS contributes greatly to the database by providing information about changes in the structure of R & D organizations and laboratories that occur over time , shifts in the business goals supported by R & D , and changes in R & D program planning and project selection emphasis .
Such information has strengthened researchers ' ability to interpret trends that have appeared in the Annual Survey data .
EIA-0224424Paul R. WoodwardDavid H. Du ; Ernest F. Retzel ; Jon B. Weissman ; Ted J. WetherbeeUniversity of Minnesota-Twin CitiesCISE RR Collaborative Data Analysis and VisualizationThis project , creating a high-speed network that will enable coupling a large number of PCs and Macintoshes to tackle computationally-intensive problems during idle times , enhances the collaboration between the University of Minnesota Laboratory for Computational Science and Engineering ( LCSE ) , Center for Computational Genomics and Bioinformatics ( CCGB ) , Academic Distributed Computing Services ( ADCS ) , the computer science research group , and Fon du Lac Tribal and Community College .
The facility will be used as a platform to perform off-line batch jobs related to visualization and data mining .
Augmenting network , storage , and graphics rendering capacity for a pre-existing student lab , the project will link together approximately 100 workstations at UMN via a Gigabit Ethernet network to service an interdisciplinary group or researchers .
UMN collaborating teams , with on exception , will move the new Digital Technology Center ( DTC ) into a common location at the heart of the campus .
This common location creates a special opportunity to exploit the workstations as a powerful data analysis and visualization engine for the genomics and scientific visualization applications of CCGB and the LCSE .
The use of workstations during the time of low student utilization is expected to provide five-to ten-fold increases in data storage capacity and bandwidth , data mining processing power , and image rendering power .
The collaboration with computer scientists , on distributed computing techniques and networked storage technology , plays a vital role in realizing the benefits .
The project , involving two students from Fond du Lac Tribal College , provides platforms for research in cluster network design , cost-effective commodity-based storage area network design and operation , distributed computing , and distributed visualization .
A fully connected Gigabit Ethernet network will be built by the collaborating team .
This network-switching fabric will interconnect the machines of the ADCS lab and the machine and network attached storage of the CCGB and LCSE .
A gigabit Ethernet link to UMN OC-12 Internet-2 connection will enable large amounts of data to be brought into the combined environment ( e.g. , NSF TeraGrid ) .
The project leverages resources and expertise to create a combined capacity for data analysis and visualization far greater than existed in any one of the participating labs before the collaboration .
The Interactive Ground-Water Tutorial Prototype Web SiteThis project constructs a prototype web-based ground-water tutorial , a hands-on tool for teaching secondary Earth and Space Science and Environmental Science students concepts related to ground-water flow and to the human impacts on surface- and ground-water systems .
Most of the work performed in this two-year , proof-of-principle project focuses on developing the interface that will enable the student to interact with the modules on the prototype web site .
The project encourages inquiry instruction by incorporating role-play exercises and mathematical simulations of ground-water flow and contaminant transport in a stream-aquifer system to solve environmental problems .
Role-play exercises could potentially include using simulation results to help prevent ( 1 ) a contaminant plume from reaching the stream and ( 2 ) contamination of an aquifer by a spill that has been dumped into a nearby stream where the aquifer is used for public water supply .
A guidance module will provide ( 1 ) a framework to help guide role-play actions and ( 2 ) an orientation for the student and ( 3 ) a means to update the student about the simulated situation during the role-play .
The project is a collaboration between the Kansas Geological Survey , the University of Kansas Upward Bound Math Science Center , Pathfinder Science , and Kansas StreamLink .
Kansas City Kansas Community College , the Lawrence , Kansas USD # 497 will participate in field-testin This proposal was received in response to the Spin Electronics for the 21st century Initiative , Program Solicitation NSF 02-036 .
The proposal focuses on the synthesis , characterization and optimization of Cobalt-doped transition metal oxide nanostructures for spin-electronics applications .
The proposed work is based on our recent demonstration of robust ferromagnetic and semiconducting behavior at room temperature in Co-doped anatase thin films .
The proposed research will establish interrelationships among the structural , optical , electronic , and magnetic properties of ferromagnetic , semiconducting CoxTi-1-x02 fabricated by a variety of physical and chemical synthesis routes , including oxygen plasma assisted molecular beam epitaxy , reactive ion-beam sputter deposition , and solution-based hydrothermal , sol-gel , and aqueous co-precipitation methods .
Different synthetic routes should lead to different morphologies and dimensionalities , including single-crystal films ( 2D ) , nanoparticles ( OD ) , and planar arrays of nanostructures .
They also have different prognoses and costs for scaling from laboratory to commercial operation .
Spin-dependent transport and magnetic behavior of these materials as a function of dimensionality and structure will be investigated .
Detailed evaluation of the band structure of the films , combined with proprietary technology involving SrTiO3 buffer layers , will be used to integrate these films on silicon substrates .
The ultimate goal will not only be to engineer these materials at the nanometer length scales , but to develop a broad set of criteria that will serve as the framework to explore the viability of other doped-oxides for spintronics applications .
Finally , the project has a broad education component that will add new dimensions to the research experience and training of graduate students participating in the nanotechnology IGERT program on the UW campus.This proposal is being co-funded by the Divisions of Civil and Mechanical Systems , Chemical and Transport Systems and Electrical and Communication Systems in the Directorate of Engineering of the National Science Foundation .
0224729HadjicostisThe main goal of this research project is to develop a comprehensiveframework for dynamical state estimation , fault detection and faultaccommodation in energy processing systems .
Such systems includeterrestrial and autonomous power systems , electric drives and powerelectronic systems , and can be found in both civilian and militarysectors.The PI 's approach is based on a family of experimentally verifiable andmutually consistent dynamic models , with various family members beingsuitable for different tasks in analysis , fault management andcontrol .
In addition to exploring hierarchical and distributedarchitectures for monitoring and accommodating for faults in energy processingsystems , he will also study simulation environments in which multiplemodels with embedded redundant dynamics are used to detectinconsistencies , and to initiate more detailed simulations to resolvethem .
He will also study economic and environmental aspects of faulttolerance in energy processing systems .
Conferences on frontier topics have played a central role in the development of Physics for decades .
The possible detection of Gravitational Wave Radiation is one of these topics .
A series of six Aspen Winter Physics conferences on Gravitational Waves and Their Detection has been very successful in exploring this subject and in galvanizing the community .
The Aspen Winter Conference on Gravitational Waves , called the Gravitational Wave Advanced Detector Workshop ( GWADW ) , usually held in January or February , will not take place in Aspen in 2002 , but is to be replaced by an analogous conference to be held in Isola d'Elba , Italy , May 19-26 , 2002 .
The conference will return to Aspen in January or February , 2003.The subtitle of the Elba workshop is , Toward a Global Detection Network .
The goal is to discuss the physics coverage that can be achieved considering that , in the near future , there will be interferometers in the US , Europe ( in Pisa and Hannover ) , and in Japan and these can be operated as a combined global array .
There is , as well , an array of resonant detectors that can be included .
Finally , space based detectors may be included someday .
Sensitivity is going to improve thanks to the many ongoing Research and Development programs .
This proposal requests travel support for participants in the Elba workshop .
This award supports U.S. participation in a conference to be heldin January 2003 in Cuernavaca , Mexico .
The conference , titledComplex Geometry and Dynamics , is being organized in honor ofAlberto Verjovsky of the Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexicoand will range widely over the fields of dynamics and geometry.The award will fund conference travel expenses of 25 juniorU.S .
participants and several speakers .
A special feature of theconference that will particularly serve the junior participantsis a set of short courses offered by M. Brunella , E. Ghys , andY .
Eliashberg .
Reactions of metal monohalides and monoxides of environmental concern are studied over wide temperature and pressure ranges .
Similar measurements are made on combustion reactions of metal cations .
Individual reactions will bestudied in isolation using the Rensselaer HTFFR ( high-temperature fast-flow reactor ) and HTP ( high-temperature photochemistry ) reactors , suitable for the 300 to 1800 K temperature domain .
Together these can be used to cover pressure from 10 to 1000 mbar .
The measurements with these facilities are free from interference by other reactions ; temperature , pressure , and concentrations can be varied independently.Very little is known of the temperature dependence of the kinetics of ion-molecule reactions .
Such reactions are usually observed below combustion temperatures , frequently in non-thermalized environments .
The use of the HTP reactors allows study of bulk , temperature-equilibrated reactions by laser-induced fluorescence , LIF .
The use of LIF provides a novel method for the study of ion-molecule reactions , which are commonly studied by mass spectrometry .
Exothermic and endothermic as well as addition reactions of alkaline-earth cations of combustion interest are addressed .
The results of this work are needed by combustion engineers , particularly modelers concerned with pollution abatement , and are also useful for workers in high-temperature materials , propulsion , chemical vapor deposition , and atmospheric chemistry .
This grant provides funding for research on methods for performance evaluation of large network models of complex systems that arise in manufacturing and communication systems .
The systems in mind are so complex that simulation is typically the only viable tool for benchmarking the system .
Unfortunately , simulation is not a particularly scalable technology .
The research focuses on developing fast and efficient simulation methods for complex systems , by exploiting prior knowledge of the system 's dynamics .
Such prior knowledge may be obtained from examination of a fluid model , for example , which is an idealized model of complex systems where all entities are modeled as fluids flowing through pipes .
A great deal is known about fluid models , and the hope is that this information can lead to very efficient simulation methods.If successful , the results of this research will ensure that simulation becomes a more scalable tool than before for a large class of systems .
The central idea is that more accurate results may be obtained in ( far ) less time than would otherwise be the case .
One can then implement more efficient algorithms for searching over different operating policies to determine the best operating policy , or at the very least one that is better than the existing policy .
The objective of this project is to improve the productivity of indole alkaloids in a well-characterized model plant tissue culture system , C. roseus .
The overall goals are to determine the metabolic effects of genetic manipulations of some key enzymes in the indole and non-mevalonate terpenoid pathways on flux through the indole alkaloid synthesis pathways , with special emphasis on the interplay between primary and secondary metabolism on the final alkaloid productivity .
The specific objectives are to 1 ) construct and characterize transgenic hairy root lines overexpressing key enzymes , such as ORCA3 , G10H , DXS , DXR and AS-beta under the control of a recently characterized inducible promoter system ; 2 ) develop methods for NMR- based metabolic flux maps ; 3 ) perform metabolic characterization of these first generationtransgenic lines ; 4 ) develop techniques for co-transformation that allow the introduction ofmultiple genes ; 5 ) construct and characterize a second generation of transgenic lines expressing strategic combinations of genes as determined from the results of the first generation transgenic lines above .
The objective of this project is to improve the productivity of indole alkaloids in a well-characterized model plant tissue culture system , C. roseus .
The overall goals are to determine the metabolic effects of genetic manipulations of some key enzymes in the indole and non-mevalonate terpenoid pathways on flux through the indole alkaloid synthesis pathways , with special emphasis on the interplay between primary and secondary metabolism on the final alkaloid productivity .
The specific objectives are to 1 ) construct and characterize transgenic hairy root lines overexpressing key enzymes , such as ORCA3 , G10H , DXS , DXR and AS-beta under the control of a recently characterized inducible promoter system ; 2 ) develop methods for NMR- based metabolic flux maps ; 3 ) perform metabolic characterization of these first generationtransgenic lines ; 4 ) develop techniques for co-transformation that allow the introduction ofmultiple genes ; 5 ) construct and characterize a second generation of transgenic lines expressing strategic combinations of genes as determined from the results of the first generation transgenic lines above .
In June of 2002 , a workshop will be held on Fundamentals of DistributedComputing at Bertinoro , Italy .
From a set of 43 outstandingsubmissions , a total of 30 white papers were selected for publication , and 46 researchers ( including a number of students ) invited to attendthe workshop .
NSF provides travel funding to support attendanceby these students , many of whom are on very tight budgets .
The workshopwill help set the agenda for a new generation of research in distributedcomputing while also knitting together the European and Americanresearch communities in the area .
Quality of the white papers was very high , and we have approachedSpringer-Verlag about the possibility of revising and extending theminto a book-length treatment .
Our hope is that we might use theworkshop to develop a unified vision and to elucidate the researchagenda in various areas of the discipline , then use this as a structurefor the white papers .
The resulting book will be both a snapshot of thestate of the art and also a coherent articulation of researchopportunities in the coming decade .
This grant is investigating alternatives for a new framework for flexible power system analysis and design .
The framework will be based on the need for power engineers that must be concerned with complex decision-making involving economic and environmental trade-offs in addition to added complications introduced by incorporation of new energy sources and increased reliability demands .
This framework will be built from formal methods for flexible power systems .
Power electronics provide the versatility necessary to physically implement flexible systems .
This research will address use of localized power electronics control techniques for generation and load , resulting in a large , complicated switching network .
Such networks have not been adequately studied .
Therefore , analytical tools , including reduced-order and parallel methods , for large-scale switched systems will be developed .
An economic analysis will be given in context of flexible power systems .
These studies will help system planners make informed decisions about the trade-offs between electrical , environmental , and economic issues .
However , making such difficult decisions is often done only qualitatively .
This project will result in more scientific decision-making techniques for these complicated issues .
Students will be better educated as a result of this project by new coursework in large system analysis and team energy projects .
Li0224602This workshop award supports fifteen American researchers in technical innovation to meet with leading Chinese researchers in technical innovation on the occasion of the Third International Symposium on Management of Technology , Hangzhou , China , October 2002 .
The U.S. and Chinese researchers will exchange information and explore opportunities for collaborative research in an area of research , namely technical innovation , that has been identified by NSF and the National Natural Science Foundation of China together as a key area of policy discussion and joint research during the first decade of the 21st century .
Members of the U.S. and Chinese teams have participated in two NSF-NSFC sponsored policy dialogues .
This bilateral workshop extends to discussions toward greater research collaboration .
EIA- 0224427Taylor , ValerieChoudhary , Alok ; Dinda , Peter A. ; Mambretti , Joel J.Northwestern University Title CISE RR ( Collaborative ) DOT -- Distributed Optical Testbed to Facilitate the Development of Techniques for Efficient Execution of Distributed Applications This collaborative proposal with Illinois Institute of Technology ( Sun , 02-24377 ) and the University of Chicago ( Foster , 02-24187 ) , acquiring data nodes and compute nodes at five sites , contributes to build a Distributed Optical Testbed ( DOT ) .
The DOT system , a product of the paradigm shift from large-scale applications running on large parallel systems at single sites to those running on distributed systems , has come about by the availability of high-speed optical networks ( E.g. , Starlight , TeraGrid 40 Gb/s network , the PacificRail 10 Gb/s network ) .
This shift necessitates techniques that allow applications to efficiently utilize distributed systems .
In contrast to parallel systems , these systems must exploit two characteristicsHeterogeneity of resources ( processors and networks ) and Dynamic changes in performance of shared resources , especially wide area networks .
The system , consisting of Linux clusters at six geographically different sites interconnected via two existing research DWDM networks , I-WIRE and OMNInet , involves the following sites Argonne National Laboratory ( ANL ) , Illinois Institute of Technology ( IIT ) , National Center for Supercomputer Applications ( NCSA ) , Northwester University Chicago Campus ( NU-C ) , Northwestern University Evanston Campus ( NU-E ) , and the University of Chicago ( UC ) .
DOT will facilitate the following research activities in the area of distributed applicationsDynamic Load Balancing ( Taylor ) Performance Monitoring and Prediction ( Dinda , Sun , Taylor ) Data Management ( Choudhary , Foster ) The first activity develops techniques utilizing network performance predictions that take into consideration the heterogeneity of the processors and networks of distributed systems to dynamically balance the load during execution .
The second extends performance monitoring , modeling and prediction techniques that have been focused on parallel systems and broadband network to distributed systems with optical networks and different topologies .
The last develops techniques that manage the distributed data such that the actual data location is transparent and the data is accessed efficiently .
These research activities are driven by three applications that have been parallelized using MPI , such that the applications can be easily ported to DOTENZO , an adaptive cosmological application , Cactus , an open framework used to solve Einstein 's equations , andAudioVoice , a virtualized distributed audio application with physical simulations that have real-time deadlines and varying computational demands.Each application presents challenges , which include adaptivity , flexible framework , and simulations with real-time deadlines .
99743430BatesThis project concerns the dynamics of both spatially discrete and continuous but non-local evolutionary systems .
In particular , we are concerned with the existence , stability , and variety of spatial patterns in interacting and reacting systems which exhibit threshold behavior .
Not just stationary patterns but also those which evolve in a predictable way .
The systems of equations arise in the field of computational neural networks designed to perform specialized tasks such as automatic image recognition .
They also arise in population dynamics , in models of phase transitions , in models of the primary visual cortex of the brain , and in computer simulation of a wide variety of continuum processes where discretization is the standard approach .
Results from the project will have a direct impact on the understanding of computational experiments and on the assumptions on which the mathematical models of many physical phenomena rest.From one perspective , the project explores some of the basic challenges of present day material science The modeling of processes which cause and accompany change of phases or crystalline variants of a substance .
New mathematical models are being continually proposed , with the hope of shedding insight into the basic physics of these processes .
Successful modeling can offer help in the development of new high performance materials , which is vital to economic and other national interests .
From another perspective , the theoretical study of neural networks will lead to the development of automatic pattern recognition , useful in such widely diverse areas as text analysis , target identification , and image enhancement .
Linking Geoscience Research and Education in Schools and Museums A Model for Scaling up Successful CollaborationsStudent-scientist partnerships ( SSPs ) facilitate experiences of genuine inquiry while also contributing data to larger scientific questions .
The Paleontological Research Institution ( PRI ) and TERC propose a collaboration to develop a model for successful , large-scale geoscience SSPs .
SSPs have involved relatively small numbers of students in localized areas .
Evaluations of student data , and learning outcomes , have posed a challenge to the few large-scale SSPs .
To overcome these challenges , scientist-educators at the PRI have developed the Devonian Seas Project .
Fourth through ninth grade classrooms have participated in classroom pilot-tests explicitly designed to meet specific challenges to the large-scale development of SSPs , including issues of data accuracy and educational pedagogy .
The results of these paleontological SSPs have been encouraging students are making important connections to their curricula and student data is sufficiently accurate to document paleontological patterns of interest .
PRI proposes to partner with TERC to develop a model for scaling-up the Devonian Seas Project .
To increase accessibility and dissemination , educational materials will be made available on the PRI Website , and catalogued with the Digital Library of Earth Science Education .
By developing a model for scaling-up successful localized SSPs , PRI and TERC will lay the groundwork for other museums and universities interested in creating effective , large-scale projects linking research and education .
CMS-0224683PI P. Aarne VesilindInstitution Bucknell UniversityTitle Assisting and Encouraging Student Opportunities for Post-undergraduate Study ( AESOPS ) Abstract Engineering schools at research universities have for many years relied on non-residents to fill the ranks of its graduate students because most qualified American engineering graduates choose not to go to graduate school .
Even with a large influx of international students , many engineering faculty have difficulty recruiting qualified graduate students to assist with NSF-sponsored research .
Recently , international tensions and security concerns have created increased difficulties in recruiting non-residents to American graduate schools .
This workshop is directed toward increasing the number of qualified US citizens and residents who chose to pursue graduate studies .
Specifically the workshop discussion will concern students who attend engineering schools which do not have a Ph.D. program.Excellent students graduating from non-PhD-granting engineering colleges often do notconsider graduate school because there is no presence of a research program and no ( or few ) graduate students at their institution .
These engineering graduates are often not aware of the graduate school option , and they are often discouraged from going on to graduate school .
These students appear to be an untapped resource of advanced-level engineering manpower.This workshop comprises Phase I of a project to encourage and assist engineering graduates from non-PhD-granting engineering schools to apply to and enroll in graduate programs in research universities .
The workshop participants will be drawn from both Ph.D. granting and non-Ph.D. granting Institutions and will include engineering researchers , administrators and teachers .
The participants will identify the sources of the problem and recommend several methods of addressing these problems .
The end product of this workshop will be a report disseminated to engineering deans .
A formal proposal to the National Science Foundation for initiating a prototype study ( Phase II ) incorporating some or all of the workshop recommendations will follow .
EIA 0224369Pandey , RajuAksoy , Demet ; Devanbu , Premkimar T. ; Olsson , Ronald A.University of California - Davis CISE RR Infrastructure for Research in Parallel and Distributed Computing This proposal , supporting parallel computing , distributed systems , ubiquitous ( autonomous ) systems , and satellite communication , aims at establishing a parallel and distributed computing laboratory within the center for software systems .
The lab will include four clusters , each connected through high speed network .
The parallel computing cluster will host several multiprocessor systems ; the distributed system cluster will include workstations and PCs , the ubiquitous systems cluster will connect embedded devices ( including handheld device sensors ) ; and the satellite cluster will host equipment for initiating the downlink communication for disseminating the data .
The sensor network will primarily be connected through an ad hoc wireless network that will be routed to the main high-speed backbone .
The infrastructure will meet the needs of four research projects in1 .
Distributed Systems,2 .
Parallel Computing,3 .
Distributed Systems Software Engineering , and4 .
Wide Area Data Dissemination.The distributed systems cluster will enable the distributed systems group to develop highly efficient , scalable , robust , and secure distributed systems that adapt to changes underlying systems conditions .
Further , the ubiquitous systems cluster will permit the group to develop new application-specific routing algorithms , novel programming models customizable middleware that seamlessly integrate sensor-based systems and scalable resource allocation , and conservation algorithms for large sensor-based systems .
The satellite communication cluster , along with the distributed systems cluster , will enable the distributed data dissemination group to develop highly scalable , robust , and secure data-dissemination techniques with adaptable quality of service .
The concurrent programming group will use the parallel computing cluster to evaluate their work on both concurrent programming languages and efficient runtime systems for parallel systems .
On the educational side , the infrastructure will be used as experimental test-beds in several courses and will form the basis for providing research students with development and analysis skills in parallel and distributed systems .
This award provides stipends and other supporting services for scholars in one-year residence as Fellows of the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences , Stanford , California .
The objective of the project is to foster the advancement of knowledge generated by scholars conducting basic research in the behavioral sciences .
The Center 's structure and procedures provide an environment that is conducive to scholarly productivity as well as interdisciplinary exchange and collaboration .
Fellows are chosen on the basis of their academic accomplishment and promise .
The research they conduct at the Center is of their own choice and design .
The Center organizes seminars , encourages the formation of informal groups , and plans common meals , all designed to promote intellectual interaction among Fellows .
The Center 's environment is designed to promote full-time research , and to minimize distractions from and interruptions to productive scientific work .
This proposal was received in response to the Spin Electronics for the 21st century Initiative , Program Solicitation NSF 02-036 .
The proposal focuses on synthesis of n-type dilute magnetic semiconductors based on GaMnN and AlMnN , and on using the resultant materials to fabricate tunneling magnetoresistance ( TMR ) and spin FET devices .
Materials growth and basic understanding of the structural , chemical and electrical properties governing the magnetism will be addressed first .
A host of characterization tools will be employed to characterize and provide guidance for the optimization of the materials growth .
Quantitative measurements of the magnetization as a function of temperature will be made using a SQUID magnetometer .
The degree of magnetic order and the magnetic transition temperature will be ascertained from temperature dependence of the magnetization and susceptibility together with the application of Arrott plots .
The roles of the nitrogen/metal ratio , growth rate and growth temperature on material properties will be investigated .
In order to determine the composition and microstructure , samples will be characterized using powder and high resolution XRD , TEM and AES .
Once the dependence of magnetic properties on growth conditions has been established , experiments will be performed to determine the role of the Mn both physically and electrically .
Bonding information will be obtained from EXAFS and XPS .
This information will be correlated with Hall measurement , photoluminescence and photoluminescence excitation spectroscopy measurements to determine the position of the Mn level ( s ) in the bandgap .
In general , samples with the same Mn concentration but different magnetic properties will be compared in order to discern any differences chemically , structurally or electrically which can explain the variance in magnetic behavior .
One of the important objectives of this program is to look at the role of co-dopant concentration and carrier concentration on the magnetic and electrical behavior of the material .
By varying the Si concentration in GaMnN and AlMnN with a fixed Mn concentration , it may be possible to vary the electron concentration independent of the Mn .
This would not only allow independent tailoring of the electrical properties and the magnetic properties for device applications , but would also allow investigation of the role of the metal insulator transition in the ferromagnetic ordering .
Through the comparison of GaMnN and AlMnN , it will also be possible to test theoretical predictions regarding the relationship between lattice constituents and Curie temperature .
Further , because of the DX centers formed by the Si , AlMnNSi may prove useful as a light activated magnetic material .
By illuminating AlMnNSi with below bandgap light , it may be possible to alter the magnetic properties .
Device applications to be pursued in this program include light activated TMR devices using GaMnN spin sources and AlMnNSi barriers , and spinFETS using conventional AlGaN/GaN HEMTs in which n-GaMnN layers are used as the source and drain regions .
Abstract for Proposal # 0224092 , Researcher and student housing at the Rocky Mountain BiologicalLaboratoryA grant has been awarded to Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory ( RMBL ) , under the directionof Dr. Ian Billick , to build researcher and student housing at the RMBL .
The RMBL is a biological fieldstation that was established in 1928 to promote research and education in the biological sciences.Unaffiliated with any university , scientists from numerous institutions throughout the United States visitthe RMBL to conduct research and teach classes .
Because students and researchers come from around theworld , the RMBL provides housing in cabins onsite .
Many of these cabins were constructed by miners inthe 1880s or biologists in the early 1930s .
This grant will allow the RMBL to provide safe , clean livingfacilities in order for scientists to conduct their work and for students to take classes.This grant will pay for the construction of three cabins , one noncooking cabin and two cookingcabins .
The noncooking cabin will house six students in a two-story building .
Each student will have aprivate bedroom and there will be a shared living area .
The cabin will be of basic wood construction withgas heating .
The two cooking cabins will each house either a researcher family or four graduate students.There will be two bedrooms upstairs with a cooking and living area downstairs.The RMBL has been an important center for biological research and training .
Scientists at theRMBL have published approximately 1000 papers in peer reviewed journals .
In addition to basic researchconducted at the Lab on diverse areas such as butterfly physiology , stream ecology , and marmot behavior , science at the RMBL has been used to shape the revision of the Clean Air Act and has documented howclimate change will affect montane ecosystems .
Scientists who have trained or worked at the Lab havebeen influential in identifying the problem of human population growth as well as founding the academicdisciplines of Conservation and Restoration Biology to provide solutions to real world problems .
Byproviding funding to renovate housing , the National Science Foundation will help ensure that scientists atthe RMBL can continue to provide information policy makers need in making decisions concerning theenvironment .
Most fundamental cellular processes are controlled at the level of transcription .
The extensive knowledge that has been acquired over the past years on the in vivo properties of the trans-acting regulators is contrasted by how little is still known about the in vivo organization , evolution and function of cis-acting regulatory elements .
Insertions of transposons have played a crucial role in the evolution of eukaryotic promoters , but the fundaments on how this has impacted gene expression is not known .
Previous studies on the control of maize flavonoid biosynthesis have provided the PI with unique tools to investigate the structure and function of cis-acting regulatory elements in their normal in vivo environment .
As a model to understand promoter function in vivo , the regulatory region of a structural gene of the pathway ( A1 ) that has been extensively dissected in vitro , and that is a target of at least two well-defined regulatory systems , will be studied .
The cis-acting regulatory sequences that are important for the regulation of A1 in vivo will be established , by determining the effect of mutations and deletions of these elements on the expression of A1 in planta , and by exploiting the natural A1 allelic diversity in the Zea .
In at least two well-characterized cases , the regulation of A1 becomes under the control of different transposable elements , albeit in exactly opposite ways.The unique understanding of the regulation of A1 makes it ideal to interpret transposable element gene control systems by providing important insights into the molecular bases of epigenetic phenomena .
The PI will investigate whether the transposon insertions override the normal regulation of A1 , and also determine whether the transposons provide novel cis-regulatory elements .
Finally , the PI will examine which components of the corresponding transposases participate in the novel regulatory patterns displayed by the A1 alleles containing the transposon insertions .
Taken together , these studies should provide one of the most comprehensive in vivo studies done on the regulatory region of a plant gene .
Because of the uniqueness of the genetic and molecular tools available , the findings derived from these studies could be fundamental to the general field of regulation of gene expression .
his proposal was received in response to NSE , NSF01-157 .
Quantumcomputing offers the prospect of computational power far beyond thatwhich could be obtained merely by scaling current technologies toever-smaller scales .
However , recent proof-of-principlerealizations of quantum computers do not appear to be amenable tolarge-scale integration , like current solid-state technology .
Oneof the outstanding unsolved problems in materials theory isunderstanding the feasibility of a solid-state quantum bit ( qubit ) , the fundamental building block of a quantum computer .
The proposed research will study the possibility to use a pair of extremelysmall semiconducting islands ( with diameters less than 20nanometers ) as a solid-state qubit .
The dynamics of quantumcontrol in this system will be investigated theoretically , including the coupling to the environment , which tends to collapsethe wavefunction of the qubit .
This problem is an example of avery general problem in quantum mechanics , that of tunneling in thepresence of a dissipative environment .
It is closely related to ananalogous problem in nuclear physics , the decay of a superdeformednucleus .
Progress in understanding the proposed mathematical modelis thus likely to impact not only nanoscience and quantumcomputing , but also nuclear physics ( femtoscience ) .
As a testbed for the solid-state qubit , it is proposed that such adouble quantum dot can be operated as an electron pump with aquantized electrical current .
Because the operating frequency ofthe proposed electron pump would be much greater than that of previous quantized current sources , it could be significant formetrology .
The accuracy of the current quantization in this set-upis a measure of the fidelity of the qubit under repeated logical manipulations .
This research is cofunded by the Divisions ofMaterials Research and Physics .
ABSTRACTProposal No .
CTS-0210242Title NER Exploring the Limits of Nanoparticle removal by Pulsed Lasers Principal Investigator Cetinkaya , Cetin Clarkson U.A method for removal of nanoscale particles based on pulsed laser particle removal technology is being proposed .
The novelty of the method is based on the removal process based on rotation and removal of the particle instead of the translation and removal .
It is well established that removal through particle rotation would require a fraction of the force compared to removal by axial force .
The PI proposes to develop a fundamental understanding for modeling the dry removal process of nanoparticles with pulsed lasers , to study the potential damage mechanisms and to determine techniques for avoiding damage in required fluences , to perform experiments to improve and confirm analytical models , and to determine a parameter space for an efficient , practical dry cleaning technique .
This is a Nanoscale Exploratory Research award .
The general idea is to understand the mechanism by which bacterial flagella switch between rotating clockwise and rotating counterclockwise , with the longer-term goal of using this information to develop nanoscale switches that can be used in practical or commercial applications .
Bacterial flagella are remarkable structures , nanometers in diameter , that possess mechanical and dynamical properties unlike any known material on the macroscale .
Composed of eleven filaments self-assembled from the protein flagellin , they may interconvert between multiple helical morphologies of both left-and right-handedness as a consequence of monomer conformational transitions that change packing properties on the subnanometer scale .
These minute molecular rearrangements have important consequences for cellular dynamics on a range of larger scales , especially so in cellular motility .
During chemotaxis , the multiple rotating flagella that provide thrust to the cells bundle and unbundle as their rotary motors , embedded in the membrane , episodically change rotational direction .
When bundled , the bacterium moves linearly ; disintegration of the bundle upon motor reversal creates a tumbling event that randomizes the cell 's orientation .
These motions of run and tumble produce the random walks that underlie chemotaxis .
The motor reversal also initiates a propagating chirality reversal , turning a left-handed helix that had been rotated counterclockwise into a right-handed helix rotated clockwise .
These interconversions occur not only from the torques of rotary motors , but may also be triggered by fluid flow past flagella.Little is known experimentally about the nanomechanical properties of flagella and especially of dynamic polymorphism .
Very recently , Dr. Goldstein and his collaborators developed the first theoretical model that explains the early , mostly qualitative , experiments on chirality transitions produced by external flows .
This continuum model incorporates monomer packing multistability into a novel nonlinear extension of elasticity theory , coupled via slender-body hydrodynamics to fluid flow .
In this way , it connects conformational transitions at the nanoscale to dynamics at the cellular scale , and captures many of the key features of those experiments .
It also makes a number of sharp predictions regarding the initiation , frequency , and velocity of chirality transformations , to date untested .
This project will use recent , important developments in fluorescent imaging methods for flagella , coupled with optical trapping methods , to conduct the first experiments on flagella under well-defined and controllable conditions of fluid stress or external forces , creating a low Reynolds number wind tunnel for flagellar dynamics .
Concurrently , Drs .
Goldstein and Kessler will extend the theoretical approach to make quantitative contact with these experiments , using the latest techniques they have developed for the study of the coupled partial differential equations that describe overdamped bending and twisting of elastic filaments .
These studies will yield important information about the stress-induced conformational transitions underlying polymorphism at the nanoscale , and perhaps open the way toward the use of these molecular switches in microfluidics or MEMS applications .
This proposal was received in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering solicitation , NSF 01-157 , category NIRT .
The goal of this project is to explore the issues of confining spin-polarized charges on the nano-scale , in zero-dimensional ( quantum-dot-like ) semiconductor geometries .
The approach is to do this in III-V- and II-VI-based magnetic semiconductors ( such as GaMnAs or ZnMnSe ) subjected to a magnetic field that is modulated on the nano-scale .
The giant Zeeman splitting characteristic of these materials is expected to exhibit nano-scale modulation resulting in tight localization of spin-polarized states .
The idea is to produce such nano-scale field modulation in a magnetic semiconductor ( MS ) in three ways ( 1 ) by lithographically-patterned ferromagnetic ( FM ) layers deposited on the MS surface ( e.g. , sub-micron Co/Pt multilayer discs ) ; by depositing and patterning superconducting ( SC ) overlayers on the MSs , where the magnetic field modulation is achieved as the magnetic flux by-passes the nano-scale SC obstacles due to the Meissner effect ; and by using unpatterned SC films , where the field modulation at the MS/SC interface is achieved via the Abrikosov vortex lattice , whose lattice constant-and thus the Zeeman-induced quantum dots separation-can be controlled by an external magnetic field .
Prior to patterning , the SC films will either be deposited epitaxially , in the same molecular beam epitaxy ( MBE ) chamber as the MS layers ; or ex-situ , by sputtering .
Key aspects of the project are theory , materials growth , lithography , characterization , and development of spintronic concepts .
The project is highly collaborative involving researchers at Notre Dame , Purdue , and U. IL at Chicago .
Additionally , the Superconductivity and Magnetism Group at Argonne National Laboratory , led by Dr. George Crabtree , will collaborate by providing magneto-transport , near-field magneto-optical mapping , as well as STM and ( eventually ) spin-polarized STS mapping of the SC-MS hybrid structures .
% % % The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials science with high technological relevance .
An important feature of the program is the integration of research and education through the training of students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area .
In addition to training graduate students in nano-science , undergraduates will also participate in research through senior projects and the NSF REU program .
It is also expected that a regular for-credit course on nano-science at the senior and first-year-graduate level will be developed .
The project combines experiment and theory , and brings together researchers from physics , electrical engineering , and material science .
Activities are designed to develop strong technical , communication , and organizational/management skills in undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctorals through unique educational experiences made possible by a forefront research environment .
Cross-disciplinary research and site visits between organizations will enhance the education and training process .
The project is co-supported by the DMR/CMP , DMR/EM , and ECS/EPDT Divisions/Programs .
*** The award is to conduct the annual National Science Foundation Design , Service and Manufacturing Research Conference .
The conference will involve researchers in all program areas within the Division of Design , Manufacture and Industrial Innovation ( DMII ) , the manufacturing researchers in the Divisions of Engineering Education and Centers ( EEC ) , Electrical and Communication Systems ( ECS ) , Civil and Mechanical Structures ( CMS ) , located within the Directorate for Engineering , Information and Intelligent Systems ( IIS ) , located within the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering , Materials Research ( DMR ) , located within the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences , International Programs ( INT ) , Social , Behavioral , and Economic Research , specifically the Innovation and Organizational Change Program ( IOC ) , located in the Directorate for Social , Behavioral and Economic Sciences who are in manufacturing related research will present ongoing activities in their current research and attend sessions which will extend beyond their immediate area of research .
Ongoing research in manufacturing related research activities are presented by the grantees from the Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnologia ( CONACyT ) , from locations within Mexico , and grantees from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council ( NSERC ) and the National Research Council ( NRC ) , from locations within Canada .
The conference ensures that the individual researchers are informed about the ongoing activities of their colleagues .
An elimination of duplication of their efforts may be achieved and a degree of cooperation may result from this activity .
An overall improvement of efficiency of the research activity could be expected .
In addition , the conference program organization allows for ample time to discuss manufacturing research in detail with the collective research community at the meeting , with feedback to and input from the National Science Foundation .
Finally , personal contacts between the grantees and program directors in the Divisions should contribute to clarify many current issues in their work.The aims of the conference are ( 1 ) to broaden the outlook of all participants ; ( 2 ) promote transfer of ideas and technology from one area of research to another ; ( 3 ) to allow those working in a related area of research to get to know their peers so as to avoid duplication of research and to encourage cooperation , and ( 4 ) to allow personal contacts from the collective research community , the NSF , CONACyT , NSERC , and NRC program staff to discuss manufacturing research in detail ( this should contribute to clarifying many current problems in ongoing projects ) .
Attendees to the conference gain an early access to the information disseminated .
0210681 Drzal This proposal was received in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering Initiative NSF 01-157 , category NER.Green nanocomposites are the wave of the future and are considered as the next generation of materials .
The lofty goals set by U.S. Government for the creation of bio-based economy present significant challenges to Industry , Academia and Agriculture .
This proposal seeks to replace/substitute existing petroleum derived polypropylene/TPO ( thermoplastic olefin ) based nanocomposites from compatibilized clay reinforced cellulosic bio-plastic through a novel approach for automotive applications .
A new bio-based product derived through nano-science approach from renewable resources ; having recycling capability and triggered biodegradability ( i.e .
stable in their intended lifetime and would biodegrade after disposal under compost conditions ) with commercial viability and environmental acceptability is termed as sustainable green nanocomposites under this high-risk exploratory research ( NER ) proposal .
The main objective of this proposal is to replace such petro-derived nonbiodegradable polymers with renewable resource-based biodegradable polymers .
Compatibilization between the nanoclay and bioplastic is the key to achieving success .
A new maleated compatibilizer is targeted to effectively bind both the clay and cellulosic bio-plastic in the compatibilized green nanocomposites.Expected Results Our research has proved the proof of concept on promising potentiality of cellulosic bio-plastic in designing green nanocomposites for high impact and high strength applications .
From our preliminary data we find encouraging results where the coefficient of thermal expansion ( CTE ) decreased by ~ 50 % and water absorption decreased by ~ 14 % on reinforcement of cellulosic plastic with 5 wt. % as received commercial clay .
However with the presence of compatibilizer we expect to get much improved properties of our targeted nanocomposites .
The synergy to be gained by maleated compatibilizer , bio-plastic development and novel processing will result in making sustainable eco-friendly green nanocomposites of industrial attractions .
This intended research program through University-Industry interactions is expected to create a consciousness among young graduate/undergraduate students in adding knowledge of materials and process engineering of new green nanocomposites and to create the growing importance of unique nano-technology to generate eco-friendly affordable green materials for 21st century automotive industries.Expected Results Our research has proved the proof of concept on promising potentiality of cellulosic bio-plastic in designing green nanocomposites for high impact and high strength applications .
From our preliminary data we find encouraging results where the coefficient of thermal expansion ( CTE ) decreased by ~ 50 % and water absorption decreased by ~ 14 % on reinforcement of cellulosic plastic with 5 wt. % asreceived commercial clay .
However with the presence of compatibilizer we expect to get much improved properties of our targeted nanocomposites .
The synergy to be gained by maleated compatibilizer , bio-plastic development and novel processing will result in making sustainable eco-friendly green nanocomposites of industrial attractions .
This intended research program through University-Industry interactions is expected to create a consciousness among young graduate/undergraduate students in adding knowledge of materials and process engineering of new green nanocomposites and to create the growing importance of unique nano-technology to generate eco-friendly affordable green materials for 21st century automotive industries .
David LiljaU Minnesota0210197Recent work in physics , chemistry , and materials science hasproduced nanometer-scale structures out of exotic materials usingsophisticated fabrication techniques .
However , very little work hasbeen conducted in computer engineering to investigate how to buildfull-scale computer systems out of these new devices.The goal of this exploratory project is to begin to develop newtechniques for constructing finite state machines ( FSMs ) out ofmolecular nanodevices .
FSMs are one of the fundamental buildingblocks of any digital computing system .
In this project , weintroduce NanoBoxes as a possible abstraction for constructingreliable finite state machines for use in molecular computersystems.The reliability and error characteristics of molecular nanodevicesare substantially different from the corresponding characteristicsof traditional silicon-based CMOS transistors .
These nanodevicecharacteristics present new challenges to computer designers whichwill require an entirely new approach for designing finite statemachines .
The techniques we develop eventually could be used tobuild entire computer systems out of molecular nanodevices.This is a high-risk/high-reward project .
The risk is that we needto develop new approaches for designing computers out of a largecollection of devices which are still under development themselves.By observing common trends in newly developed molecular devices , wemake assumptions about their weak drive capabilities and theirunstable nature .
While we expect that we can adapt and extendtraditional space , time , and information redundancy techniques forfault-tolerance into this new domain of molecular computers , newideas will be necessary to develop appropriate solutions.This project is high-reward , however , since by conducting computerarchitecture research in tandem with research on the nanodevicesthemselves , we will be streamlining the development process to beable to have fully-functional molecular computers more quickly thanif we wait for the nanodevice research to solidify .
Furthermore , while we are tailoring our techniques for molecular nanodevices , ourtechniques also will be applicable to error detection and correctionin quantum nanodevices and in nanometer-scale conventional CMOSdevices , which are becoming more fault-prone as transistor sizesshrink.This project will make substantial contributions to educational andhuman resource development .
It will initiate the dissertationresearch of a Ph.D. student in electrical and computer engineeringto focus their research in this new area .
We also expect to involvea few M.S .
students in this work and possibly provide researchopportunities for undergraduate students through existing internshipprograms at the University of Minnesota .
This study will synthesize findings of the portfolio of research projects funded by the ROLE program .
Research methods include the analysis of survey findings , document analysis , and interviews with appropriate elite informants .
Dissemination plans include presentations at conferences ( including the ROLE PI meeting ) and scholarly publication .
This project was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering initiative , NSF 01-157 , category NER .
This project is to develop a nanofabrication technique based on near-field optics to manipulate , modify and process matter at the nanoscale .
This approach exploits the interaction of matter with the evanescent electromagnetic field of a laser exiting from a sub-wavelength aperture probe placed in close proximity ( at a distance an order of magnitude smaller than the laser wavelength ) to a substrate .
This approach integrates techniques of microfabrication and MEMS , sub-wavelength photonics and near-field optics to produce structures in the sub-100 nm regime .
The research consists of five tasks 1 ) Near-field optics modeling and analysis , 2 ) Design and fabrication of the near-field optical probe , 3 ) Development of a high precision positioning stage for the optical probe , 4 ) Nanoscale laser materials processing and characterization , and 5 ) Fundamental studies on nanoscale transport phenomena and light-matter interaction .
Together , these tasks will establish the scientific and technical basis for a near-field nano-optical laser processing technique.This research will have the following impact on nanoscale science 1 ) A scientific foundation for understanding the fundamental physical mechanisms governing transport phenomena in near-field nanoscale laser-matter interaction .
2 ) A scientific basis for systematic design of apparatus for near-field nano-optical laser materials processing .
When successfully completed , this research will result in the following impact on nanotechnology 1 ) New techniques for very rapid fabrication of two-dimensional and three-dimensional nanostructures .
Applications include massively parallel maskless nano-lithography , massively parallel ultrahigh density magneto-optic phase change data storage , maskless nanoscale patterning of optical and photonic bandgap structures , polymeric and biological materials , and nanoscale laser-assisted chemical vapor deposition .
2 ) New techniques for massively parallel in-situ material characterization , process monitoring and manipulation at the nanometer length Applications include massively parallel nanoscale temperature measurement , flow control and valving in massively parallel micro- and nano-fluidics , and manipulation of biological molecules in vivo .
Several industrial interactions are anticipated as a result of successful technological developments from this research .
This project will train undergraduate and graduate students in the exciting fields of MEMS/microfabrication , photonics and near-field optics .
Research results will be disseminated in national and international conferences and journal publications .
Scientific fundamentals of near-field laser-matter interactions will be incorporated into an existing graduate course in Laser Materials Processing .
The self-assembly of nanostructures on surfaces and in porous media has been studied extensively by experiment , and is of interest in a wide range of applications , including optical and biological sensors , lithography , fabrication of nano-scale devices , and biomimetic materials .
Despite this wide interest , the few attempts to develop theories and simulation methods for these systems give a poor account of the formation of the nano-structures and the effects of major variables ( surfactant architecture , nature of surface , temperature , concentration , etc .
) on them ; some trends ( e.g .
temperature dependence ) are predicted to be the opposite of those found experimentally.The aim of this project is to carry out a one year feasibility study to develop and evaluate a new multi-scale molecular simulation strategy to predict the equilibrium behavior of nano-structures formed from non-ionic surfactants on planar surfaces and in nano-pores .
The simulations will cover size ranges from sub-Angstrom to hundreds of nanometers by using a combination of ab initio , atomistic simulation , and discretized lattice Monte Carlo simulation methods .
By optimizing the lattice discretization and intermolecular potentials , the PI hopes to develop an approach that can predict not only the nanostructures that form , but the influence of temperature , composition , solvent , surfactant architecture , nature of the solid surface , and morphology of the pore structure , on the self-assembled structures .
The challenge will be to include a sufficient level of molecular detail and sophistication in the model , while preserving sufficient simplicity that calculations can be made in a reasonable time on current computers.The feasibility of the method will be evaluated by comparison with experimental data .
Criteria for success will include ( a ) correct prediction of qualitative trends of property behavior ( adsorption , structures , aggregate size , heats ) with variation in temperature , concentration , type of surface , etc. , ( b ) quantitative agreement with experiment , and ( c ) computational burden of the calculations .
This research will investigate the changing gender and power relations occurring among urban Senegalese Muslim women by systematically analyzing ritual and non-ritual dance performances in Wolof-speaking communities in Dakar .
The project , to be conducted by a doctoral student in cultural anthropology at Rutgers University , compares two dance events ( tours and sabars ) with ritual dances ( baptisms and marriages ) based upon informal and semi-structured interviews of performers and observers , oral histories , methodic coding of videotaped danced events , participant observation , and archival data .
In a society where men 's roles and activities typically overshadow those of women , performance provides a socially sanctioned context in which women may affect the constraints of social differences based on gender , age and caste .
The investigator of this project hypothesizes that women 's tour associations ( neighborhood dance groups ) are innovative forms of community building in response to widespread urbanization and social change .
Testing this hypothesis and studying the functioning of this mode of social networking will contribute to theories on social transformation as well as those on gender dynamics .
Of broader significance is the proposal 's focus on an activity central to women 's strategies to build solidarity and change gender and power relations .
Understanding this process is a valuable contribution to the widely acknowledged need for a more comprehensive knowledge of the variations in Muslim cultures and of the ways by which women negotiate their roles in these cultures .
0210351 SinghThe primary objectives of the proposed NIRT ( Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team ) research addressing the theme on manufacturing processes at the nanoscale are to ( 1 ) develop processing methods to manufacture novel superhard thin films of controlled nano-structures and properties in the ternary ( C-B-N ) system , ( 2 ) develop advanced techniques to characterize the nano-structures of selected new superhard materials , and ( 3 ) relate the scale of the nano-structure ( 1-50 nm ) to their unusual properties such as hardness .
With this vision in mind , the premise of the proposed NIRT is that the functionality/property of nano-structured materials in the form of thin films and coatings can be designed by employing a suitable nanoscale architecture and distribution of the basic structural building blocks to control the properties at a scale of 1-50 nm .
In this proposal we seek to address the design of superhard and nano-structured thin films not by just refining the polycrystalline microstructural scale , but rather by exploring the novel routes for processing/manufacturing , characterizing , and controlling the nano-structure of new materials in order to achieve unusual mechanical , physical , thermal , and possibly other properties .
Thus , materials will be first designed and processed/manufactured to have only short-range order and then nano-structured thin films will be created by clever modifications of the non-equilibrium processing methods , and/or kinetic/thermal manipulation of the networks/nanostructues to create nano-crystalline thin films .
The eventual aim of these activities will be to develop predictive tools for designing and synthesizing materials with unusual properties/hardness so that a knowledge base for creating materials by design will be obtained .
To accomplish these goals of the NIRT , a truly interdisciplinary and complementary research team has been assembled.On a broader scale , a successful completion of this research will lead to a knowledge base for designing and manufacturing nano-structured superhard materials in the ternary C-B-N system with unusual mechanical and physical properties for applications in machining , electronic devices , MEMS , and functional/protective coatings .
Graduate and undergraduate students and research associate/post doc will be trained through participation on this research project and their MS and Ph.D. theses .
In addition , minority/women high school and undergraduate students will also be mentored and exposed to this research .
This award supports a research project aimed at exploring novel process strategies to develop closed-cell polymer foams that have cell sizes in the range of nanometers .
The idea of creating nano-scaled cells in polymeric materials is exciting and largely unexplored .
Due to the unique structures , nanofoams are expected to have many properties that are superior to those of existing materials , such as a much higher strength-to-weight ratio .
In addition , nanofoams would provide novel functional materials that could be tailored for the needed properties , for example , thermal conductivity , dielectric constant , acoustic and damping coefficients .
Nanofoams have the potential to be used for any applications where foamed polymers are currently used , with the benefit of further material savings and improved performance .
These novel materials will find a wide range of applications in construction , packaging , motor vehicle , microelectronics , and household products.This research will explore the creation of nanofoams from the PMMA-CO2 system using a solid-state foaming method .
The retrograde vitrification phenomenon will be employed to increase the gas diffusivity and solubility .
Both conventional solid-state foaming techniques and the stress induced bubble nucleation method will be explored to develop the nanofoaming process .
A low temperature and high pressure vessel will be designed and instrumented .
Gas solubility and diffusivity will be measured .
Properties of the new nanofoam materials , such as the morphology , mechanical properties , and dielectric properties , will be characterized in this research .
This proposal describes a systematic study of the synthesis , characterization , and application of TiO2 nanoparticles as photocatalyst .
The potential of the nanoparticles to absorb in the visible range by tailoring the surface , structural and compositional properties will be studied .
Specifically , the multifold objectives of this proposal include the utilization of a unique physical vapor deposition process to obtain TiO2 nanoparticles with particle sizes ranging between 1 and 20 nm , and to reproducibly dope the nanoparticles with various dopants .
These nanoparticles will be characterized for structural , chemical and optoelectronic properties .
Of particular interest is the characterization of the valence band and conduction band structure by XPS , UPS , and EXAFS .
We will also utilize first-principles calculations to acquire an atomistic understanding of nanoparticle properties .
The theoretical models will be used to develop an understanding of the chemical and photochemical properties of pure and modified TiO2 nanoparticles .
Modification involves the selective decoration of nanoparticle surfaces with noble metal particles including Ag , Au , Pt , etc .
Titanium dioxide ( TiO2 ) is used as a photocatalyst for environmental cleanup .
Upon absorption of light , it helps break down toxic chemicals in air and in water .
TiO2 , however absorbs only UV light .
It would be more useful if its absorption of the visible light can be enhanced since most of the sunlight is in the visible range .
This proposal describes a systematic methodology to increase visible range absorption by changing the particle size , composition and surface chemistry.This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation Nanoscale Science and Engineering ( NSF 01-157 ) .
The award is jointly supported through two directorates at NSF ( i ) Mathematical and Physical Sciences ( Division of Materials Research in the Ceramics program ) and ( ii ) Engineering ( Division of Chemical & Transport Systems ) .
The project is a collaborative theoretical and experimental study of self-assembled oxide poly-domain architectures in film/substrate heterostructures .
The polydomain structures of thin films on substrates are strongly determined by their mechanical constraints the misfit between the film and substrate , the orientation and local structure of the film/substrate interface , and the geometri-cal configuration of the film .
The goal of this research is to design controlled polydomain struc-tures through constraint engineering to obtain enhanced functional properties of ferroelectric and ferromagnetic film materials .
Different techniques of constraint engineering ( modification of film/substrate misfit , patterning of films and film/substrate interfaces ) will be employed to achieve this goal .
These techniques will be developed and tested on PbTiO3-Pb ( Zn , Ti ) O3 ( PZT ) tetragonal films , which demonstrate strong piezoeffects .
Subsequently , the techniques will be ap-plied to films of highly adaptive ferroelectrics with compositions near the morphotropic phase boundary in the PZT system .
Polydomain engineering will also be applied to ferromagnetic oxides of the La1-xSrxMnO3 system , which exhibit colossal magneto-resistance and promising mag-netostrictive properties .
The research objectives are sought through a combination of theory , modeling and experimental verification of theoretically obtained domain design principles .
Theo-retical work will include analysis of internal stresses and energetics of polydomain structures , phase field modeling for non-patterned films , and finite element analysis ( FEM ) for local stress effects and patterned films .
The experimental work will consist of thin-film processing , engi-neering of patterned films , design of polydomain structures and their characterization by X-ray diffraction , electron microscopy , scanning force microscopy and magneto-optical imaging tech-nique .
Measurement of electric , magnetic and mechanical properties of films will also be per-formed .
% % % The project addresses fundamental research issues in areas of electronic materials science having technological relevance .
An important feature of the project is the strong emphasis on education , and the integration of research and education .
The combined resources , including experimental and theoretical methods , provide special opportunities for education and training of graduate stu-dents involved in highly interdisciplinary forefront research .
*** DMS-0210822Dennis P. SullivanOne of the effective techniques of mathematics for dealing with problems of several parameters or dimensions is combinatorial , or algebraic , topology .
In that field , geometric objects , called cycles , associated to constraintsare grouped into deformation or homology classes which then combine and decompose in various combinations to define algebraic structures of such richness to provoke a theoretical study in the own right of a variety of algebraic structures .
Recently some of these structures have appeared in theoretical physics in the attempted formalism to describe term by term models for quantum phenomena.In collaboration , the principal investigator has recently discovered related algebraic topology structures in the space of strings ( open and closed ) filling up a space ( time ) model .
This award will sponsor investigations to conceptually clarify the occurance of algebraic topology in theoretical quantum physics and to relate the results ofthese investigations to new string algebra .
ABSTRACTProposal Number CTS-0210044Principal Investigator Prosperetti , AndreaAffiliation Johns Hopkins UTitle Finite-size particle in homogeneous turbulenceAn effective computational approach has been developed by the PI for direct simulation of finite size particles suspended in incompressible fluid .
The proposed project investigates the feasibility of using this method for direct simulation of many finite size particles in homogeneous turbulent flow .
If successful , this approach would provide a powerful tool to analyze the challenging problems associated with the impact of particulate turbulent flow .
This Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Team ( NIRT ) , co-funded by the Divisions of Materials Research ( DMR ) , Chemical and Transport Systems ( CTS ) and Design , Manufacturing and Industrial Innovation ( DMII ) will use genetically directed synthetic methods to permit exact control of the placement ( at intervals of .6 nm , 1.0 nm , and/or 1.6 nm ) of reactive chemical groups along a polypeptide backbone .
These reactive groups will be both biologically active and electroactive providing novel materials for processing into fibers via electrospinning techniques .
The fiber morphology , which will be varied by a judicious choice of processing conditions , will be characterized by electron microscopy , small angle neutron scattering and Raman spectroscopy .
Mechanical properties of individual fibers will be evaluated using MEMS and NEMS devices while the biological activity of the electrospun fiber mats will be investigated by cell incubation studies. % % % The results of these investigations will provide molecular design rules for future biomaterial constructs and will lead to a new generation of tissue scaffold materials for wound repair .
The hybrid bio-electronic materials that result will address some of the lifetime and brightness issues for next generation flat panel computer displays that are critical for future industrial manufacturing .
The integration of this research and education through externship experiences at DuPont and the development of new courses on nanomaterials design and processing will provide knowledge and an experience base that will equip students with the work-force ready skills critically needed by industry .
*** The ubiquitin/26S proteasome system is the major process by which proteins are selectively degraded in eukaryotic cells .
Little is currently understood about how the ubiquitin system selects substrates , and the polyubiquitinating mechanism is not understood clearly .
A small number of viral proteins have been shown to be substrates for ubiquitin-mediated destruction .
These include the 3C proteases of the encephalomyocarditis virus ( EMCV ) and hepatitis A virus ( HAV ) and the 3D RNA polymerase of HAV .
These viral substrates for ubiquitin/26S proteasome system offer the opportunity to study the mechanistic details by which proteins are selected and ubiquitinated by the ubiquitin-conjugating machinery , as well as to examine the potential role of selective protein destruction in picornavirus replication .
A major goal of this project is to employ the EMCV and HAV 3C proteases as substrates for measurements of binding affinities to ubiquitin system enzymes and for addressing the fundamental questions of whether polyubiquitin chain synthesis occurs via a processive mechanism and whether it can involve more than one ubiquitinating enzyme complex .
This research will also initiate a characterization of the ubiquitin-conjugating system that targets the HAV 3D polymerase for degradation , in preparation for future studies of how this substrate is selected and what function its destruction serves in HAV replication .
This project includes an endeavor to develop an inducible expression system for 3C protease genes cloned into mammalian cells , and this system will be used to evaluate the cytotoxicity of the EMCV 3C protease and to determine whether a failure to ubiquitinate the 3C protease effects the efficiency with which EMCV is replicated .
These studies will involve undergraduate students in research on the mechanism of some of the crucial steps in protein degradation .
AWARD ABSTRACTThis pilot project will develop a high-throughput strategy to analyze native expression patterns and subcellular localization of Arabidopsis gene products of unknown function .
This strategy , Fluorescent Tagging of Full-Length Proteins ( FTFLP ) , will comprise five major steps ( 1 ) Selection of functionally unassigned Arabidopsis genes and prediction of their protein structure and suitable site for fluorescent tag insertion ( 2 ) Amplification of each gene in two parts , with the junction between the two parts corresponding to our chosen insertion site for the fluorescent tag ( 3 ) Introduction of the fluorescent tag , yellow fluorescent protein ( YFP ) using a triple overlap PCR approach ( 4 ) Insertion of PCR products into binary vectors ( 5 ) Production of transgenic Arabidopsis lines and analysis of expression pattern and intracellular localization for each tagged protein .
As a pilot approach , the project aims to analyze a statistically significant number of genes to support the applicability to a subsequent wider study .
To this end , approximately 800 genes ( listed at the already operational project website http//arabidopsis.org/info/2010_projects/proteintagging.html ) were selected from a total of ca .
8,000 unknown genes .
This pilot list was chosen based on the following sequentially-applied criteria 1 ) have matching full-length cDNA , 2 ) are annotated as 'unknown protein ' or 'putative protein ' , and 3 ) do not have any Gene Ontology annotations .
The selected genes reflect the diversity of all the unknown Arabidopsis genes with respect to plant specificity , predicted domain and/or gene family information , and availability of matching full-length cDNA sequences.FTFLP as a tool for functional proteomics offers three significant advantages it focuses on genes of unknown function , it produces internally-tagged full length proteins that are more likely to exhibit faithful intracellular localization , and it utilizes native promoters to allow us to determine tissue specificity .
Three deliverables will be offered to the research community 1 ) Expression vectors harboring full-length sequences for each gene under its native promoter and tagged with YFP flanked by unique restriction sites,2 ) Arabidopsis transgenic lines expressing each construct , and 3 ) A website and a searchable database containing information about the lines and constructs , including the gene sequences highlighted with positions of primers and tagging sites , vector construct information , images and text descriptions of the protein expression pattern and intracellular localization , and protocols and standard operation procedures in experimentation , analysis , and interpretation .
Also , a Reference Protein Subcellular Localization Map will be constructed using fluorescently-tagged proteins with known intracellular targeting .
These resources will be available to the public through two unrestricted venues DNA constructs and transgenic seeds will be distributed through the Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center ( ABRC ) whereas gene sequences and expression and subcellular localization data , including fluorescence microscopy images , will be disseminated via the project website integrated into The Arabidopsis Information Resource ( TAIR ) .
Importantly , this sharing of the resources and results of this project through ABRC and TAIR , respectively , will take place on a continuous basis as the deliverables become available .
Announcements on the availability of new resources will be made through such electronic media as the Bionet USENET newsgroups and parallel e-mail lists.This project significantly advances the overall objectives of the 2010 Project by characterizing on a large scale the expression and subcellular localization of unknown Arabidopsis genes .
Our understanding of Arabidopsis biology will be glaringly incomplete without such knowledge .
In addition , this project has a broader impact on the society and science .
Once this pilot project demonstrates the feasibility of the proposed approach , it will serve a basis for developing a laboratory curriculum for use in cell biology training of high school students and teachers as well as beginning investigators at the CSHL DNA Learning Center and the annual Arabidopsis Molecular Genetics Course , and at the biannual UCR Plant Cell Biology course .
Finally , a teaching outreach program with community colleges will involve undergraduates in summer research .
Thus , our program will bridge genomic approaches with cell biology in the laboratory and classroom , and generate important novel information and tools to characterize the Arabidopsis proteome .
A workshop on Hybrid Systems Computation and Control was held at Stanford University , March 25-27 , 2002 .
The importance of hybrid discrete and continuous control has emerged over the last several years , as hardware and software technology provide ever more applications , ranging from everyday life to mission-critical situations .
At the same time , the lack of a satisfactory , cost-effective design methodology for reliable and efficient hybrid controllers has become apparent .
This workshop , emphasizing issues in computation and control , was one in a series dedicated to developing a scientific community and a body of knowledge that synthesizes discrete and continuous technologies .
The purpose of the workshop series is to provide a regular , annual forum for novel results , methodologies , and tools in the emerging area of hybrid systems .
The proceedings of the workshop are published in the Springer-Verlag Lecture Notes in Computer Science series .
This proposal was received in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering Initiative , Program Solicitation NSF 01-157 , in the NER category .
The proposal focuses on innovative materials synthesis strategies to create both passive , and magnetically-driven mechanically active precision separation membranes .
Of particular interest is the development and characterization of well-controlled , stable , and uniform nano-dimensional membranes capable of the separation of viruses and/or proteins during the blood fractionation processes and the blocking of antibodies and complement molecules from encapsulated xenogeneic cells .
It is hypothesized that high surface area cylindrical capsules the walls of which are comprised of nanoporous membranes , created via a two-step process of electric-field driven anodization of aluminum or titanium , can be used for the absolute filtration or exclusion of biomolecules in the nanometer range .
For a given capsule , a windowpane structure is used with anodized nanoporous windows , and un-anodized aluminum struts for structural support .
The aluminum anodization process enables precise control of pore size , with a controllable pore diameter of approximately 10 nm to 100 nm depending upon anodizing voltage .
Beyond making passive membranes , the investigators propose fabrication of cylindrical nanoporous biocapsules incorporating magnetoelastic elements .
Incorporation of the magnetoelastic elements enable the biocapsule to be mechanically vibrated , remotely from a distance , by application of a time-varying magnetic field that should enable controlled transport through the membrane .
A magnetoelastic thick film layer will be electroplated onto the aluminum structural supports of the capsule .
Such capsules could possibly find application as in-vivo drug delivery devices , where needed medicine is delivered in precise amounts by external application of a magnetic field .
As a further aspect of the proposed research , the investigators seek to build upon their expertise in fabrication of nanoporous alumina films of high uniformity to fabricate surface coatings comprised of perpendicularly oriented gold-coated magnetostrictive nanowire arrays .
The utility of these arrays will be investigated for their utility in prevention of biofouling .
It is hypothesized that the needle-like shape of the nanowire array elements , and the wave-like movement of the magnetostrictive nanowire array in response to a time-varying non-uniform magnetic field , will help prevent protein attachment to the surface , and could ultimately be used to move or transfer cells across the surface .
The proposed research will determine optimal routes for fabrication of the nanoporous capsules with attention to membrane functionality as biological filters .
The application of passive nanoporous biocapsules for cellular encapsulation and immunoisolation , and mechanically active biocapsules for controlled transport and delivery through the nanoporous membranes will be investigated .
In addition , the use of magnetostrictive nanowire arrays will be investigated for their use in the prevention of biofouling .
The proposed outcomes are ( 1 ) Determining a path for in-situ or in-vivo controlled drug delivery by application of an external time varying magnetic field .
( 2 ) Determination of a surface that would prevent biofouling , facilitating the introduction of medical devices into the human body .
Several recent meetings have highlighted the growing interest in thebiological , ecological , environmental , and other research communitiesin the development and deployment of large distributed systems forinformation collection , aggregation , analysis , simulation , predictivemodeling and realtime analysis within their respective disciplines.Likewise , recent events have caused concern and raised interest in theneed for similar systems in the context of homeland security .
It seemsapparent that a structured discussion of the needs for these systemscould create opportunities for synergistic efficiencies between thevarious user communities .
To date , however , no such discussions havebeen held among these differing user communities , nor among thesecommunities and the groups providing and developing technologies tosupport their needs.It is with the possibility of identifying such potential synergiesthat the Multi-Sector Crisis Management Consortium ( MSCMC ) isorganizing a series of workshops to discuss the design , developmentand deployment of such systems From Sensor to Supercomputer and BackSystems for Information Collection , Aggregation , Analysis , Assessmentand Realtime Simulation .
To begin exploring these synergies , MSCMC isproposing the following workshop.The purpose of this workshop is to summarize the current and projectedstates of sensor , communication and power technologies for collectionand communication of information from distributed sensor systems withlarge numbers of nodes , and to survey the present and expected needsfor such systems in environmental , facility , medical , crisismanagement , public safety and national security arenas .
A succinctsummary of the current and projected technologies mapped to currentand projected user requirements is envisioned to result from thisworkshop.This workshop will bring together experts in field sensor , processing , wireless , field power source technologies , to structure solutions forthe common problem of collecting and communicating data , includingfrom remote field locations , by cost-effective , scalable , integrateddevices and networks.The workshop will examine the user needs and technologies involved infield deployable systems for information gathering includingsensors , wireless communications and power supplies , up to the localaggregation point .
While the integration of locally gatheredinformation into larger infrastructures for purposes of analysis isalso required , such integration is beyond the specific focus of thisworkshop.It is intended that this two day workshop will produce ( 1 ) understanding by participants of the current state of the art and availability of technologies of sensors , power , integrated circuits , and wireless , and how they may be employed in our society .
( 2 ) determination of current and future needs for better capabilities ( 3 ) suggested courses of action to integrate available technologies into scalable , reliable , cost-effective devices and networks of value to meet those needs , including for both the general scientific and research community and to government agencies seeking better ways to protect the public from chemical and biological incidents ( 4 ) proposed design and production of devices not now available or suitable for the above purposes ( 5 ) recommendations for regulatory relief , especially for design , manufacture , and use of workshop-proposed wireless technologies for the above purposes ( 6 ) recommendation for further work in these ares , and identification of potential collaborations and partners .
ABSTRACTProposal No .
CTS-0210220Title NER Biotemplate Directed Assembly of Nanocrystal ArraysPrincipal Investigator Yu , Michael , Johns Hopkins UThe assembly of well defined 2D nanocrystal arrays of semiconducting and metallic materials using biologically assembled nanoscale template is the major goal in the proposed project .
The PI will explore the purple membrane , a naturally occurring membrane protein crystal patch from halobacteria as a precisely structured nanoscale template .
The key is to develop genetically engineered purple membranes that display unique functional groups on the membrane surfaces with well defined nanoscale symmetry .
These reactive functional groups are used as specific anchoring sites for nanocrystals immobilization .
0210495CarneyThis proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering initiative , NSF 01-157 , category NER .
Nanoscale science and engineering is the bedrock upon which 21st century technological progress will be based .
Large carbon molecules , such as buckyballs and nanotubes have gained recognition as promising tools for use in developing nanotechnology .
Due to the electronic structure of the carbon atom , large carbon molecules can display a range of conduction behavior from insulator to semiconductor to semimetallic to metallic .
The molecules also display striking mechanical properties that have already been brought to application in technology such as atomic force microscopy where nantubes have been used as probe tips .
The optical properties of nanotubes remain largely unknown .
As device development continues , optical inspection methods also become more important .
The PI 's will perform exploratory theoretical investigations of the interaction of carbon nanotubes and light .
This work is timely and is needed to direct experimental studies and device design in the near future .
They will compute the electronic ( excitonic ) mode structure of a realistic device a carbon nanotube of finite length .
The electronic structure calculation will be carried out with a fully quantum mechanical treatment .
They will then compute the coupling of these modes to an external electromagnetic field .
The resulting description of the nanotube will facilitate analysis of the structure in an optical field .
This will enhance their understanding of the results of optical measurements and will also point to uses of nanotubes as components of a nano-optical system .
Near-field microscopy is one application of particular interest here and will be investigated in some depth .
Practical applications of the theory will cover a great breadth of fields ranging from near-field microscopy to integrated optics .
With this award Professor Moeller will continue his work on the use of intramolecular anodic olefin coupling reactions in synthetic organic electrochemistry .
This work involves the development of stereocontrolled synthetic methods based on radical cation chemistry and then the utilization of these chemical reactions in the synthesis of natural products .
Proposed new method development on asymmetric electrochemical cyclizations utilizing chiral ketene acetals as substrates could lead to a new enantioselective carbon-carbon bond forming reaction .
Reactions discovered with prior NSF support will be applied to several total syntheses in the new support period .
The first two total syntheses involve key tandem cyclizations , the first of which are initiated by electrochemically generated enol ether radical cations , whereas the last two syntheses utilize highly functionalized furans as the initiating group .
With this award , the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr. Kevin D. Moeller of the Department of Chemistry at Washington University in St. Louis .
Dr. Moeller will work on the use of electrolysis to generate chemical species which react with predictable patterns and selectivities .
Use of electrolysis to generate reactive intermediates may prove to be a new green synthetic method with potential industrial applications .
If large quantities of oxidants and reductants currently used in organic synthesis could be replaced by reliable electrochemical methods then many redox synthetic methods could be made more environmentally friendly .
This group will also explore stereoselective oxidative cyclization reactions .
These reactions produce molecules which are chiral ( have two nonsuperimposable mirror images ) and make only one of the two possible forms ( a single enantiomer ) .
Development of this family of reactions is one of the most important problems facing the pharmaceutical industry today .
When developed , Dr. Moeller 's work could be applied to the environmentally friendly syntheses of a number of biologically active molecules .
Students trained during the course of this work will gain skills needed by the pharmaceutical industry which now produces a number of single enantiomer compounds .
This project was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering initiative , NSF 01-157 , category NER .
The purpose of this research is to develop the technology to deliver regulated torques to nanosystems ; such torques would be on the order of piconewton-nanometers .
Helicallv structured light possessing angular momentum will be used in an optical trapping arrangement to deliver angular momentum to trapped particles thereby applying a torque to the trapped object .
Position and orientation of a trapped object will be achieved with a trapping beam constructed from the interference of a helical wave front and a plane wave .
This research focuses on developing an optical trap using a conventional single-beam trap architecture ; constructing the requisite helically-structured laser beam modes as Laguerre-Gaussian ( LG ) beam modes and constructing an interference pattern between LG beam modes and plane-wave beam modes .
Torque spectroscopy experiments of biomolecules will be performed .
Candidate molecules are coiled-coil proteins like myosin , modular matrix proteins like fibronectin and tenascin , and the DNA double helix.This research program will have a broad impact in the advancement of knowledge , education , industry and technology .
An optical torque-trap is an enabling technology for the comprehensive development of nanoscience and engineering , and will have wide application in nanotechnology from characterization to fabrication .
In nanoscale biosystems it would be used to provide an understanding of the behavior of single molecules .
For nanoscale structures , it would enable the characterization of novel nanoscale structures and phenomena which depend upon rotary motion .
Finally for nanoscale manufacturing processes it would enable new nanofabrication processes which would depend upon the manipulation of particles in six-dimensions Other applications include measuring the torque and power output of rotary nanomotors , measuring the bending strength of molecules , measuring the drag on nanobearings , and driving nanosystems by photonic components .
This program will also have impacts in new curriculum for graduate students , combining elements of engineering and physics for nanoscience and engineering ; the study of nanosystems and nanobiosystems ; training opportunities for undergraduate students in nanotechnology through participation in research projects ; and industrial collaboration providing technology transfer and training opportunities for faculty , research associates , and students .
The proposal was submitted under Solicitation NSF 01-157 Nanoscale Science and Engineering , under the Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team ( NIRT ) category .
The research examines a novel concept for direct thermal-to-electrical power generation .
The concept involves electron emission from arrays of carbon-based nanostructured emitters , such as carbon nanofibers and diamond nanotips .
With characteristic dimensions of one to ten nanometers , these materials enable highly efficient electron emission and the possibility of quantum confinement effects that enhance the energy conversion process .
However , the conversion of thermal energy to electrical energy using such structures has not been previously explored in detail .
Specific research tasks include development of synthesis processes , material characterization and analysis , experimental and theoretical analyses of electron energy distributions , and characterization of energy conversion under practical conditions .
In addition , the program will support trans-institutional education and training initiatives through a graduate student exchange program and a joint seminar series on nanotechnology to be held in conjunction with the MBA programs of the participating institutions , which include Vanderbilt , Purdue , and Michigan State .
NSF support is being provided by the Chemical and Transport Systems Division and the Design , Manufacturing and Industrial Innovation Division in the Engineering Directorate , and by the Division of Materials Research in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate .
Differences between the sexes are pervasive in both animals and plants .
Such dimorphism can result from selection directly on a trait or it can be a result of genetic correlations between traits .
The investigators will test the hypothesis that multiple characters exhibit sex differences in the dioecious plant Silene latifolia , because of genetic correlations between traits .
This hypothesis will be investigated with two quantitative-genetic experiments .
The first incorporates a set of controlled crosses and subsequent measures of progeny , to determine the pattern and magnitude of genetic covariances among traits .
The second experiment will involve artificial selection to investigate how labile the genetic correlations are between flower traits and physiological traits .
They will select on the combination of traits rather than on individual traits to alter the correlation between traits , the most powerful way of breaking correlations.These experiments are centered on measuring and altering genetic correlations .
These correlations can occur because of pleiotropy , in which one gene affects more than one trait , or because of linkage , in which the genes affecting traits are inherited together .
The first of these , pleiotropy , leads to long-term correlations between traits , whereas linkage can be easily broken by selection .
If the investigators are unable to break the correlation between traits , then this will lend credence to the hypothesis that pleiotropy contributes to patterns of genetic correlation and differences between the sexes .
0210298LvovThis proposal was received in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering Initiative , NSF 01-157 , category NIRT.This project targets the synthesis of nanoscale functional materials and their potential for applications in medical and biological areas .
The research team has been assembled to develop methods for fabrication of useful composite materials based on principles of self-assembly and includes researchers in chemistry , physics , engineering , biomaterials , and pharmacology .
The nano-encapsulation method to be elaborated involves the formation of a colloidal core with defined composition and size , and the preparation of an outer shell providing the required stability , permeability , compatibility , release of core material , and catalytic or affinity properties .
This project was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering initiative , NSF 01-157 , category NER .
Nanoscale materials are now fabricated by a variety of means , but the dominant methods rely on self-assembly or advanced lithography .
These and other fabrication schemes , especially self-assembly , can create structures in which the molecular orientation perpendicular to the surface is controlled by the chemistry , conferring the functionality .
This project will take control of orientation one step further - so that the molecules can also be locally oriented in the plane of the surface .
Variations of the orientation on a < 100 nm length scale permits nanoscale functionality based on the relative orientation of molecules to be obtained .
This is a powerful concept for high performance molecular devices , since the properties of molecules are highly anisotropic .
The 'nanopoling ' scheme should be much more effective at orienting molecules than current poling methods due to the larger electric field that can be generated locally .
The central task of this project is to demonstrate the attachment of oriented molecules to a surface .
Major tasks will be the identification of the best method for each of a few classes of molecules ( conjugated polymers , porphyrins , DNA ) , to model the orientation and attachment processes , and to study the dependence of these processes on field strength and electrode geometry .
The latter will require the facile scanning probe microscope .
Topography and orientation of the molecules is characterized with polarization-sensitive near-field optical microscopy ( NSOM ) utilizing the same probe as deposited the oriented molecules , and the electrical properties are obtained via lithographically-defined contacts .
The novelty and importance of this project evolves from the breaking of the in-plane symmetry within the nanostructures .
It will result in new types of nanostructures with novel properties and functionality .
This will lead to new devices .
In this project we will focus on the science of the growth process with a scanning probe microscope .
Ultimate usage for fabrication of the novel devices engendered by this deposition technique will require much faster fabrication methods .
The prospects for large-scale fabrication once the processes are understood are good , and we have defined a possible route to a mask-based technology resulting from these studies .
It is proposed to conduct experimental research to investigate the relationship between Brownian motion and shear induced migration in biomedical microdevices .
And to use the Brownian motion to characterize the temperature of the system .
It is also planned to develop an interdiscidplinary course with the co-PI who is a faculty member of the English Department to help educate non-science students on nanoscale technologies .
This proposal was received in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering Initiative , Program Solicitation NSF 01-157 , in the NIRT category .
The proposal focuses on developing novel chemical approaches to forming well-behaved and robust interfaces between small organic molecules and both conducting and insulating inorganic ultrathin films for applications in molecular scale electronics .
Much of the success of present day microelectronics is due to the ability to integrate a variety of ( mostly ) inorganic materials into structures useful for devices .
For example , silicon dominates the field not because of its intrinsic electrical properties , but because of the quality of the interfaces it forms ( e.g. , the Si-Si02 interface ) .
The work to be conducted here seeks to develop organic-inorganic interfaces possessing equivalent or superior properties , where small organic molecules form the active layers .
The solution lies in the development of chemically based approaches to the formation of the critical interface between the inorganic layers ( both metallic and dielectric ) and the organic layers .
Success in this venture will require the application of sophisticated synthetic organometallic chemistry , surface and interface science , self-assembly and nanofabrication , and chemically accurate ' computer simulation .
The team that has been assembled at Cornell possesses expertise and significant experience in all of these areas .
The organic layers will typically be formed by a process of self-assembly ( in solution or in vacuo ) on substrates that have been patterned to expose selected areas comprised of metal ( e.g. , Au ) , oxide ( e.g. , Si02 ) , or nitride where the self-assembled monolayer will bind .
Study of patterned substrates is vital for the investigation of a number of issues , from the fundamental to those related to device design and performance .
Ultimately the team seeks as a final set of goals ( i ) development of novel organometallic precursors for the formation of both conducting and insulting layers that will interface seamlessly with the organic layer ; ( ii ) development of a fundamental understanding of the interface formation process , including the effects of process variables such as temperature on the molecular scale structure of the interface ; ( iii ) demonstration of controllable device properties for molecular scale electronics , given enhanced knowledge of the interfacial chemistry and physics ; and ( iv ) development of computer models that can both predict the atomic scale structure of the interface , and the resulting electronic properties .
A final significant challenge put forward by the Cornell team will be the development of a workshop on research ethics .
From the experience of working to develop this workshop the participants hope to build a better understanding and recognition of responsible research conduct , and to know the relevant philosophical underpinnings of ethics sufficiently well to be able to make ethical choices in both the development and practice of their research .
With National Science Foundation support Alexia Smith and Dr. Julie Hansen will investigate the impact of climate change on agricultural practices in the Near East during the Bronze and Iron Ages ( 3050-535 B.C. ) .
A region-wide drying event is thought to have occurred at the end of the third millennium B.C. , and this study examines its impact on food production strategies .
Palaeoethnobotany , the study of human uses of plants in antiquity , is a prime tool for investigating ancient agriculture .
Carbonized plant remains can be preserved on archaeological sites for thousands of years and may be systematically recovered by placing a soil sample in a large tank of water , whereby the botanical remains float to the surface for collection .
The presence of crop plants , together with their associated weed assemblages , allow for the reconstruction of ancient agricultural practices .
Palaeoethnobotanical remains collected from Tell Qarqur , a multi-period site on the Orontes River in NW Syria , will be analyzed to determine how crop production changed over time .
Tell Qarqur lies just north of the Ghab Valley , where a number of pollen cores have been examined , making Qarqur a prime location for considering the effect of local environment upon food production .
The questions asked include 1 ) What crops were grown and do cropping patterns change over time ?
2 ) What types of ecosystems were exploited for wild plants ?
3 ) If the habitats exploited change over time , does this reflect a changing environment ?
Examination of the flora currently surrounding the site and collection of modern botanical samples will greatly assist in identifying the ancient remains.This data will then be placed into a regional context and evidence for agricultural and environmental change from sites in Syria , Israel , Lebanon , and Jordan will be examined based on published palaeoethnobotanical , zooarchaeological , and palaeoenvironmental reports .
Together these countries provide a promising opportunity to examine the ways people modify agriculture in relation to their environment , since steep precipitation gradients exist and food productions strategies are likely to change over relatively short distances .
The questions asked include 1 ) Within a given time period , do the major crops vary with increasing distance from the coast , or along a north-south axis ?
2 ) If so , is this reflected in the faunal remains ?
3 ) Can distinct food production zones be identified from the data , and if so , do the boundaries of these zones change with time ?
This research is important for several reasons .
First , it provides information on Bronze and Iron Age agriculture in Syria , of which little is known .
Second , this study synthesizes a large body of published data from the Near East , thereby providing a firm basis for examining environmental change and shifting agricultural patterns .
Finally , recent climatic data suggest that many semi-arid regions will become drier over the next few decades due to global warming .
This study will yield a deeper understanding of how people have adapted their farming practices in response to past climatic shifts , knowledge that would greatly aid modern-day developers to enhance production within current low-technology or subsistence agriculture .
A new theoretical model of resonant cyclotron interaction of ions with Alfven waves in the divergent solar wind plasma will be constructed .
It is based on a scale separation between the characteristic scales of wave-particle interaction ( microscopic scale ) and the scales of nonhomogeneity ( macroscopic scale ) .
The latter is five to six orders of magnitude larger than the former .
The overarching goal of the study is to explain recent observations of the solar wind which have revealed that ( 1 ) the bulk speed of the particles considerably exceeds that of the protons , ( 2 ) the differential motion of the ions is aligned along the magnetic field , and ( 3 ) the differential speed follows the local Alfven speed .
CCR-0210421Wolfgang Porod and Gary H. BernsteinNER Computing Architectures for Coupled NanomagnetsWe explore the feasibility of developing computing architecturesimplemented in magnetically-coupled arrays of nanometer-sized dots andpillars .
Similar to the electronic Quantum-Dot Cellular Automata ( QCA ) scheme , which was previously developed by the Notre Dame group , information is encoded in the magnetization of single-domainpermanent-magnet structures , and the physical interaction betweenneighboring magnets provides the local connectivity .
The main goal ofthis project is to investigate how logic functions can be realized instructured arrays of coupled nanomagnets .
We propose a joint theoreticaland experimental approach to explore the feasibility of such magneticQCA-like architectures for computing and signal processing .
Oncefeasibility of elementary logic functions is established , one mayenvision special-purpose cellular processor cells composed of couplednanoscale magnetic sensors and memories .
The robustness of such magneticsystems opens the potential for applications where nanometer-sized , yetrugged , systems are required with a wide range of operatingtemperatures .
NER Proposal # 0210428PI Faquir JainNanochannel FETs and Quantum Dot based Nonvolatile Memory Cells using Site-Specific and Layer-by-Layer Self-Assembly TechniquesSummaryThis proposal aims at forming nanochannels ( 10-30 nm length with ~100nm width ) , using SiOx-Si nanomasks deposited via site-specific self-assembly , to fabricate FETs with enhanced performance .
In addition , it seeks to develop quantum dot based nonvolatile memory cell structures in floating gate and floating trap configurations .
These nonvolatile memory cells are proposed to be grown using layer-by-layer self-assembly of ZnS-cladded CdSe or ZnCdSe quantum dots ( with core diameter ~3-5nm ) .
The final goal is the integration of FETs with nonvolatile memory cells to design programmable circuits .
This proposal was received in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering initiative , NSF 01-157 , category NER .
Nanoparticle-supported ( 10-100 nm in diameter ) catalysts that can be removed by the application of a magnetic force will be developed .
The magnetic capability of the nanoparticles provides a way for simple and efficient recovery of the catalysts by using a magnetic field .
The required features of magnetic nanoparticles for use as effective catalyst supports include chemical inertness , weak inter-particle interaction , large magnetic permeability , high saturation magnetization , and flexibility for surface chemical modification .
Spinel ferrite nanoparticles offer an excellent platform for design and control of magnetic properties to satisfy these criteria .
These materials derive their unique magnetic properties from their nanoscopic size , which prevents the formation of multiple domains within a nanoparticle , allowing each nanoparticle to behave like a single paramagnetic atom with a giant magnetic moment .
Furthermore , it is possible to control the magnetic properties of these materials by adjusting their composition at the atomic level .
Therefore , it is possible to tailor the magnetic properties of the nanoparticles for specific applications .
Each nanoparticle will have a thin silica coat , which is functionalizable and chemically inert .
If successful , this research would lay the groundwork for an entirely new class of highly active polymerization catalysts that could allow for the recovery and reuse of these organometallic catalysts .
AbstractProposal Title 2002 Gordon Research Conference on CatalysisProposal Number CTS-0210083Principal Investigator Jingguang ChenInstitution Gordon Research ConferencesThe Gordon Conference on Catalysis ( GCC ) in 2002 will be held on June 23-28 Colby-Sawyer College in New Hampshire .
The conference will focus on several areas that are key to the fundamental understanding of catalytic systems molecular level characterization of catalysts , quantitative descriptions of reaction pathways , novel materials , fuel cell catalysis , chiral catalysis , and the conversion of nitrogen oxides in combustion products .
The themes and speakers are of interest to both academic and industrial communities .
Current and future trends in heterogeneous catalysis will be the general theme .
This grant will provide partial support for speakers , graduate students , post-doctoral students , and younger faculty .
Xu & WangNER-0210820This proposal was received in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering initiative NSF 01-157 , category NER , and is co-funded by the GEO Directorate.The emergence of nanotechnology has made it possible to manipulate material structures at nanometer scales and has greatly advanced our understanding of how these nano-scale structures give rise to novel physical and chemical properties not seen in bulk materials .
Nano-scale pore structures , also called mesoporous structures , are ubiquitous in geologic and engineered materials .
Our preliminary studies , both experimentally and theoretically , indicate that chemical reactions in mesopores can be significantly modified , both thermodynamically and kinetically , due to the nano-scale confinement .
The objective of this proposal is to ( 1 ) clarify the sorption behavior of chemical species in a nano-scale pore space confinement as compared to that in bulk solutions and test the hypothesis that metal sorption on mesopore surface can be greatly enhanced by the confinement effect ; and ( 2 ) to determine the rates of aqueous species diffusion in nano-scale channels to test the assumption that these channels can provide passages for mass transport during chemical reactions.To isolate the effect of nano-scale pore space confinement , we will conduct parallel sorption experiments on non-mesoporous materials , and the measured sorption capabilities will be compared between mesoporous vs. non-mesoporous materials .
Particular attention will be paid to the possible effect of electric double layer ( EDL ) overlap in mesopores on ion sorption and diffusion .
Based on the experimental data , a new surface complexation model will be proposed to explicitly include the effect of EDL overlap .
The issues to be addressed in this proposal are fundamental , and the proposed work will highly impact many aspects of geochemical research .
The proposed research will establish a theoretical foundation for the development of high-performance functional materials for solving challenging environmental issues we are facing today .
With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program ( MRI ) Program , the Department of Chemistry at the City University of New York - City College Campus will acquire a 500 MHz NMR Spectrometer .
This equipment will enable researchers to carry out studies on ( i ) studies of chemically modified nucleosides and DNA ; ( ii ) synthesis of unusual nucleosides and studies on DNA containing them ; ( iii ) synthesis of high energy-density N-nitramino and geminal difluoramino solid propellants ; ( iv ) studies of the structure and dynamics of selected isolated protein fragments to learn about the unfolded state of proteins ; ( v ) novel pharmacophores against opportunistic infections related to AIDS ; ( vi ) studies of the S-layer protein of Lactobacillus brevis ; and ( vii ) synthesis of enediyne glycofuranosides .
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance ( NMR ) spectroscopy is the most powerful tool available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules .
It is used to identify unknown substances , to characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules , and to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution .
Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research .
The results from these NMR studies will have an impact in a number of areas including synthetic chemistry , pharmaceutical chemistry and biology .
The proposal was submitted under Solicitation NSF 01-157 Nanoscale Science and Engineering , under the Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team ( NIRT ) category .
Carbon nanotubes ( nanopipes ) offer a unique opportunity for fundamental studies of fluid transport in the spatial regime between molecular and continuum behavior .
This research includes ( a ) fabrication , characterization , and modification of carbon nanopipes , ( b ) performance of chemical and fluidic experiments , and ( c ) fabrication of experimental setups that would allow transport and measurements of various liquid flows in a controlled fashion .
Both actuation and imaging of the fluid are done in a transmission electron microscope , and offer a unique opportunity for studying the behavior of fluids in nanosize channels at conditions corresponding to sub- , near- or super-critical regions of the thermodynamic diagram .
The hydrothermal growth technique will be optimized to produce desired tube structure and geometry ( internal/external diameter , length , and shape ) for incorporation into experimental devices that allow the transmission of liquids through nanotubes .
Fluid behavior in channels ranging from 5 to 100 nm in diameter will be investigated , both by following the dynamic response of visualized fluid interfaces to external thermal stimuli and by well controlled experiments , in which pure liquids and liquids laden with macromolecules will be transmitted through the tubes .
The chemistry of high-temperature interactions between carbon nanopipes and aqueous fluids will be studied .
Chemical modification , metallization , and opening of nanopipes will be done using bipolar electrochemistry .
The experimental work will be supplemented by modeling based on parallel molecular dynamics simulations .
It is believed that the proposed research will advance the fundamental understanding needed for the design and fabrication of a new generation of nanofluidic devices , such as nano-pumps , chemical factories on a chip , biochips , and nano-analytical systems .
The research team will also coordinate and expand the existing education and outreach activities of the individual investigators into a cohesive and wide-ranging program .
The work involves investigators at Drexel , the University of Pennsylvania , and the University of Illinois at Chicago .
NSF support is being provided by the Chemical and Transport Systems Division and the Design , Manufacturing and Industrial Innovation Division in the Engineering Directorate , and by the Chemistry Division in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate .
Energy is vital for both the propagation and maintenance of organisms .
Thus , the use of metabolic energy and the heat that is produced as its byproduct is a major theme in modern biology .
Animal energy usage is usually measured by indirect calorimetry that relies upon the exchange of respiratory gases by the organism ( e.g. , oxygen consumption or carbon dioxide production ) .
An important complication in such analyses is that the relationship between respiratory gas exchange at the lungs and metabolic heat production is variable .
These variations could have important consequences for our understanding of energy use by animals by producing substantial ( e.g. , > 30 % ) errors in energetic analyses .
This project will quantify the relationships between metabolic heat production in animals and their respiratory gas exchange , and determine the sensitivity of these relations to variables most likely to importantly affect energy metabolism .
Critical variables to be explored include diet composition , intensity of metabolism , time of day relative to the animal 's physiological cycles , and extent of time spent feeding or fasting .
The most likely physiological bases of currently unexplainable variation in the relations between respiratory gas exchange and metabolic heat production will be explored .
This portion of the research will focus on quantifying the various fates of the carbon dioxide that is produced by animal metabolism ( e.g. , exhaled through the lungs , stored in the body ) .
This research will be conducted using a broad range of animals ( insects , reptiles , birds ) in order to evaluate the extent of biological variation in these basic energy relations .
This dissertation investigates the ability of a state to manipulate national identity by investigating the history of the former German city of Koenigsberg after it was taken over by the Soviet Union in 1945 and renamed Kaliningrad .
In the following decades , the pre-war history of the city became the focus of a struggle between the Soviet state , the local administration , and the Russian speaking citizens .
Despite Soviet prohibitions , the local population maintained the German history of the territory .
Interviews and archival data will be used to document the state-promoted official history and the efforts by the local intelligentsia to reproduce the German history of the territory .
Architectural projects ( deconstruction , reconstruction , and preservation ) provide an especially valuable historical record for understanding how these conflicts over collective memory varied over time with changes in the political regime .
The development of ecosystem-based management is a major paradigm shift in the study and management of native forests in the western United States .
A key component of this new scientific-management paradigm is the recognition of past natural and human-caused variability in disturbance processes and forest conditions .
Understanding the spatial extent and temporal changes of climatically-sensitive disturbances such as fire as ecological mechanisms that have affected forest composition and structure is essential for managing natural areas .
However , in most ecosystems we lack detailed studies on the behavior and effects of ecological mechanisms such as fire .
This doctoral dissertation research project will utilize fire history data in combination with intensive tree age data to determine past fire types and fire effects across the elevational range of ponderosa pine in the northern Colorado Front Range .
The objectives of the study are 1 ) to determine variation in past fire behavior in relation to topographic position and elevation within the ponderosa pine zone ; 2 ) to determine the effects of past fires on forest regeneration through detailed reconstruction of forest age structure over a range of habitat types within the ponderosa pine zone ; 3 ) to synthesize the results of objectives 1 and 2 into a series of fire regime-stand development models for major habitat types within the ponderosa pine zone .
In order to characterize fire behavior and the resulting effects across the montane zone in the northern Colorado Front Range , a multi-scale sampling approach will be applied .
Sampling and synthesis will be conducted at three scales 1 ) broad-scale GIS analysis of fire regimes and habitat types across the northern Front Range ; 2 ) meso-scale sampling of forest structure and fire history in areas of 30 to 100 ha ; and 3 ) intensive age structure and fire history analyses in plots of approximately 100 to 500 m2 .
In the context of ecological restoration , it is important that we have a better understanding of the spatial variability of fire regime type ( surface , stand-replacing , or mixed ) as it has changed over the past several centuries in ponderosa pine forests and woodlands .
Through a multi-scale approach of reconstructing past fire regime types and forest age structure , this study will produce a series of habitat-specific models of fire-regimes and stand development for the lower through the upper montane zone .
These models can be used by resource managers in formulating the goals of fire and vegetation management in particular types of habitats .
We know that fire regimes have varied significantly over both time and space in the montane zone , but we lack a useful classification of past fire regimes according to habitat type .
A classification of fire behavior within different habitat types of the montane zone will allow managers to project appropriate fire management prescriptions within the historic range of variability .
As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award , this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research career .
ABSTRACTOCE-0221295OCE-0221029OCE-0221336Investigation of the chemical structures of the uncharacterized fraction of marine dissolved organic matter remains an elusive goal for marine organic chemists .
An approach to be used in this work is to directly address supramolecular size scales of marine organic matter structures by assessing their microheterogeneity on micro to nanoscales .
Using Scanning Transmission X-ray Microscopy ( STXM ) , a technique that allows the registration of Near Edge X-ray Absorption Fine Structure ( NEXAFS ) spectra , will allow the quantification of the relative abundance of different functional groups and element bonding types .
This spatial mapping of the chemistry of macromolecular assemblages at scales intermediate between bulk chemical analysis and analysis individual molecules or molecular classes offers the capabilities of a important new analytical tool to marine chemistry .
In a survey mode , a range of organic materials collected and contributed by several researchers from different parts of the world 's oceans will be examined using these techniques .
This approach will be extended with additional samples of collected sediment and suspended ( trapped ) particulates .
Laboratory experiments using whole phytoplankton and bacterial cultures will be used to provide materials appropriate to the earlier stages of organic matter diagenesis .
Guangzhao Mao , Wayne State UniversityOrganic Crystal Growth on Flexible TemplatesThis project will to explore the possibility of morphological control and confinement of organic crystals using polymeric templates .
The nucleation and crystallization of model organic dyes will be studied on two-dimensional ( 2-D ) polyelectrolyte templates , and in three-dimensional ( 3-D ) polyelectrolyte shells by atomic force microscopy and other in situ methods .
The proposed research aims at ( 1 ) understanding the effect of polyelectrolytes on organic crystallization ; and ( 2 ) encapsulating organic crystals in polyelectrolyte shells.This research explores the rich interplay between the surface structure of polyelectrolytes and the habit of nascent crystals .
Polyelectrolytes exert templating effect via preconcentration of lattice ions , geometric and stereochemical match , specific interactions , and adsorption-induced stabilization .
Polymeric substrates differ from inorganic templates in that they do not show the order and rigidity implicit in the epitaxial mechanisms .
However natural polymers are known to induce crystals of a uniform habit that is different from those grown without the polymers .
Research in biomineralization has shown that the templating effect of polyelectrolytes does not require the same degree of geometric match as the inorganic counterparts .
Polyelectrolytes may display rich stereochemical control because of their many surface conformations .
There may exist several geometric matches for a given crystal face .
Segments protruding into solution may stabilize side faces of the nascent crystal .
Based on the above notions , an approach consisting primarily of experiments , but also utilizing the Cerius2 program , will be used to study the interfacial structure between the polyelectrolyte template and the nascent dye crystal .
Initial experiments will focus on the crystallization of dyes on 2-D thin films so that the kinetics and crystal habit modification can be probed at the molecular scale .
The kinetic parameters include critical supersaturation , pH , induction time , and rate of crystallization .
The crystal habit variables include size , shape orientation , and correlation to the template structure .
In the second stage , the study will focus on the dye crystallization inside the polyelectrolyte shell .
The shell will consist of polyelectrolyte multilayers permeable to small polar molecules but not their crystals .
In addition to the polyelectrolytes , supported phospholipid bilayers will be used as templates because they provide intermediate order and flexibility .
This project is intended as a proof-of-concept study .
Future work can go beyond the generic polyelectrolytes using polymers with higher architectural definitions such as amphiphilic polymers , ionomers , and biopolymers.This research may have broader impact in terms of its relationship to the concept of nano-science and technology especially in areas such as materials processing , color displays , information storage , nanocomposites , drug encapsulation , and sensors .
For example , the encapsulated colloids can be used as tips for micropipettes , as chemical sensors to detect pollutants , and as heterogeneous catalysts.Also , the support will allow the P.I .
to continue exploring the molecular mechanisms in the templated growth of organic with potential applications in encapsulation , coatings , and materials processing .
It will also help the P.L to establish long-term collaboration and exchanges with a foreign research institution the Max-Planck-Institute of Colloids and Interfaces .
Some experiments will be conducted at the Institute with a number of characterization methods not present at the P.I .
's home institution .
The planned educational and outreach activities include incorporation of research topics into materials engineering curricula , global education associated with the World Bridge program , mentoring of Detroit high school students in the Science Summer Camp program , and training science teachers from local community colleges .
ABSTRACTOCE-0221825The study focus is to consider the range of dissolved organic matter ( DOM ) release processes exhibited by marine phytoplankton species , to describe how these processes regulate and couple to the cycling of fixed carbon and nitrogen species in the surface ocean , and to model , based upon both controlled laboratory and field experiments , the interactions of these chemical species between phytoplankton trophic structure , community succession and senescence as mediated by viral lysis , micro and macrozooplankton grazing and bacterial heterotrophy .
A series of hypotheses , involving the production and consumption of dissolved organic carbon ( DOC ) and nitrogen ( DON ) compounds , will be tested on each of a series of manipulable culture experiments and a program of seasonal cruises in both estuarine Chesapeake Bay and coastal upwelling dominated Monterey Bay as contrasting physical systems .
Modeling objectives include a mechanistically informed simulation of field and culture experiments capable of descriptive and predictive insight as to DOC and DON composition , molecular weight and bio-availability as a function of trophic structure and complexity .
Associated educational activities will be centered around highlighting the current research efforts of this multidisciplinary investigation in the context of public education programs coordinated by the Virginia Institute of Marine Sciences Mini-School program .
This existing course development program has intensive participatory and outreach components and proposes to expand the opportunities of the pubic to learn about how contemporary scientific issues such as biocomplexity in marine environmental systems are being approached by research scientists .
Award is for a coordinated seismic and coring study of the Storegga Slide on the Norwegian Margin .
The Storegga slide developed in sediments thought to have contained substantial amounts of gas hydrate .
Examining this slide area will test the hypothesis that submarine landslides can release methane from hydrates into the oceans and/or atmosphere and thereby affect climate .
The study will test three major hypotheses ; 1 ) How much gas hydrate is present in the Storegga region , 2 ) did methane escape as a result of the slide , and if so , how much ?
3 ) does hydrate dissociation promote submarine landslides ?
A 43 day cruise of the R/V Ewing will acquire high resolution seismic reflection data , three component ocean bottom seismic data and jumbo piston cores .
The University of Missouri-Columbia , the National Center for Supercomputing Applications ( NCSA ) , the University of Illinois , and the Missouri Botanical Garden are collaborating on this pilot project to build a prototype core integration system for a national digital library for SMET Education .
The technical infrastructure for the system builds on the NCSA distributed information retrieval system , EMERGE .
This system is being extended to an adaptive and flexible distributed search engine for a wide variety of learning environments and resources , and is being tested on the rich plant contents of the Missouri Botanical Garden , and the NSF Plant Genome projects at the University of Illinois ( Soybean ) and the University of Missouri-Columbia ( Corn ) .
Seamless coordination with services is being offered on several learning environments , including NCSA 's Biology Workbench 3.2 .
A digital repository , BLOE ( Biological Learning Object Exchange ) , serves to collect and organize experiments , simulations , and projects from learners and teachers for collaborative learning .
Additional project activities include studies of requirements of user services , management procedures , evaluation methods , and technical standards using various undergraduate and graduate programs of the two universities and the K-12 educational activities of the Missouri Botanical Garden .
This grant enables the installation and operation of equipment at Duke University for measuring the ULF ( ultra low frequency ) magnetic field associated with certain lightning discharges .
A strong and long-lasting current sometimes flows after lightning strokes in the conducting channel they leave behind .
Called the continuing current , it is not well understood but is a detail of the physics of lightning that is thought to be related to cloud electrification and to phenomena in the high atmosphere such as sprites and elves .
Continuing currents produce signals in the ULF magnetic field that can be detected as far as 2000 km from the lightning source .
Methods will be developed on this project to detect continuing currents remotely and infer their duration and waveform from ULF measurements .
The data interpretation will be validated by comparing measured waveforms of the continuing currents associated with triggered lightning at a field station in Camp Blanding , Florida , with the waveforms inferred from ULF measurements .
A goal is to continuously record the magnetic fields from lightning discharges detectable at the Duke ULF station and relate the measurements to storm structure and meteorological conditions .
If the continuing current turns out to be related to storm severity or stage of evolution , it may be a useful tool for the study and forecasting of storms .
A few foreign transnational corporations ( TNCs ) dominate professional business services ( advertising , accounting , legal , and management consulting activities ) worldwide .
An analysis of location patterns of branch offices of these global producers finds that Asia Pacific has the highest concentration of global business service centers of all developing regions , with Southeast Asian cities emerging as important third tier hubs in the global business service network .
Existing literature on the internationalization of business services views these peripheral nodes of global networks as passive recipients of foreign investment .
Yet in many business services in Southeast Asia , locally generated dynamics appear to be emerging which indicate that the region is shifting from being a passive recipient of foreign investment , to a generator of local business service activity and a source of competitive advantage for TNCs .
The main goal of this doctoral dissertation research project is to examine foreign direct investment in professional business services -- the form it takes , its determinants and its impacts on developing metropolitan economies of Southeast Asia .
A secondary goal of the research is to determine implications for public policy .
This research addresses current theoretical biases based on a case study of the Southeast Asian advertising and marketing industry .
The analysis has two components an in-depth case study of the industry 's development in a single city , Bangkok , to develop and refine the theoretical framework , and a cross-national comparative study of the development trajectories of a single TNC firm operating in Bangkok , Manila , Kuala Lumpur and Singapore .
The TNC acts as a proxy to control for variation in firm organization , strategies , ownership and services , thus regional variations in the TNC 's strategy , role , and interaction with other locally based firms will indicate differences in country-specific factors .
Hypotheses are tested using a mixed research approach that combines in-depth , semi-structured interviews with firms and key informants , archival research of organizational histories and government policies , and statistical analysis of the service economy and professional business services industries in each city .
Anticipated findings from this research are that ( 1 ) sources of firm competitive advantage increasingly originate locally , in the branch firm and through linkages with other local agencies , suppliers , and supporting institutions ; and ( 2 ) TNC investment is having a stimulating , rather than stifling , effect on the development of local factors of production in this industry.This project research will contribute to a refinement and deepening of knowledge in three key theoretical areas of regional development studies international producer services theory , East Asian development theory , and the theory of international networks of production clusters .
In particular , the research will provide insights into urban economic development in Southeast Asia through enhanced understanding of the impacts of internationalization and emerging local dynamics in foreign-dominated global business service industries .
The findings will also inform developing countries about the development of policy frameworks and initiatives aimed at promoting the knowledge economy and enhancing innovation and productivity through professional business services .
As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award , this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research career .
In March 1999 about 150 researchers gathered in Como , Italy for the first International Conference on Analysis of Microbial Cells at the Single Cell Level .
The beautiful surroundings of Como were an excellent setting for discussing the function of individual cells and how individual cells can be analyzed .
The Conference participants , a mixture of biologists and engineers , addressed the three questions WHY do we need to analyze at the single-cell level ?
This gives important information about cellular function , cell-cell interactions in different ecosystems , and because population dynamics , to a large extent , determines the overall function of large scale cultures used in the biotech industry .
HOW do we analyze at the Single Cell level ?
Through the use of flow cytometry , image analysis , and mathematical models it is possible to analyze cellular function at the single-cell level .
WHEN to analyze at the single-cell level ?
Both in basic research on cellular function and in applied research aimed at improving biotechnology processes.In June 2002 , the second International Conference on this theme will take place in Vejle , Denmark .
At the Conference , the focus will again be on the three questions WHY , HOW and WHEN , and the latest developments within this interesting research field will be presented .
With the advances in genomics , the rigorous analysis of the phenotype becomes an important and timely issue .
The Conference also aims at further strengthening and enlarging the scientific network established at the first Conference , and to promote specifically communication between biologists and engineers .
The organizing committee plans to submit a final report of the Conference to the National Science Foundation soon after the Conference .
Under this award , the PI will continue participating in a collaborative study of the Cleft segment of the Juan de Fuca ridge .
The field work has been and will continue to be done with MBARI vessels and ROVs , in active collaboration with D. Stakes , M. Tivey , and others .
The PI 's main responsibility is in sampling of volcanic rocks , interpreting volcanic land forms , and undertaking laboratory analyses of the rock samples .
One field program occurred in 2000 , and another will take place in 2002 .
The PI has additional rock samples from the area collected in 1990 and 1994 .
The PI proposes flow mapping of the axial and off-axis region with a variety of goals and objectives , one of which is to test the split-ridge model of Kappel and Ryan for tectonic and magmatic cycles forming the symmetrical land forms on either side of the present ridge axis .
Axial and off-axis sampling out to ~6km ( 150 ka ) will be used to test this idea , and elucidate the processes of crust creation and evolution in the near-axis region .
A full laboratory program of major and trace element studies and isotopic studies are planned for ROV-collected and wax cored samples .
This award will support , under the aegis of the Biocomplexity in the Environment initiative , a conference at Oregon State University to examine the vertical organization of energy , carbon , and nutrient cycles in Crater Lake , Oregon .
The unusual properties of this ultra-oligotrophic lake result in the vertical stratification of the ecosystem reminiscent of pelagic marine systems .
Crater Lake provides a natural laboratory to study the coupling of biological processes , element cycles , and the physics of the environment.Specifically , the award will provide some organizational support for the workshop and travel and subsistence support for experienced and new investigators , as well as students , to participate in presentations and discussions that synthesize the latest scientific understanding of Crater Lake and nutrient cycling .
Discussions will also involve how best to proceed in the future to increase our knowledge of such ecosystems .
Crater Lake , the deepest lake in the United States ( i.e. , 590 m ) , is a closed-basin caldera lake formed after the explosive eruption of Mt .
Mazama , ~7700 years ago .
The lake , which rests at an elevation of 1882 meters in the Cascade Mountains of south central Oregon , is surrounded by steep caldera walls and has a very small watershed .
There are no major inlet streams and no surface outlet .
External inflows of nutrients to the lake are low and dominated by precipitation and dry deposition from the atmosphere .
Thus , the lake is ultra-oligotrophic and one of the clearest bodies of water on the earth .
In spite of its great depth , vertical mixing is relatively rapid ( i.e. , 3-5 years ) and recycled nitrogen is mixed upwards from the hypolimnion representing the largest source of this limiting nutrient.Crater Lake is the centerpiece of one of the premier National Parks in the United States and it provides a unique setting to directly engage the public with compelling educational experiences demonstrating the function of complex aquatic ecosystems and the methods of interdisciplinary field research .
It offers a unique resource for the study of the interaction of atmospheric forcing and land surface hydrology with biogeochemical cycles in aquatic ecosystems .
Secondary pelagic dispersal of juvenile benthic organisms following initial larval settlement may strongly influence local and regional population dynamics , yet secondary dispersal is rarely considered in recruitment studies .
While the relative importance of post-settlement blue crab dispersal in determining recruitment patterns in Pamlico Sound , NC , is presently recognized , the factors initiating movement by early juvenile blue crabs away from settlement habitats , the mechanisms mediating across-sound transport , and the population-level consequences of redistribution to alternative habitats , have not yet been explored .
This project will address these issues through an interdisciplinary study that incorporates ( 1 ) small-scale field measurements in seagrass beds along the sound-side of the Outer Banks to identify the factors cueing initial movement from settlement habitats , ( 2 ) laboratory experiments to test the behavioral mechanisms that drive pelagic emigration , and ( 3 ) sound-wide hydrographic surveys to characterize Pamlico Sound circulation coupled with synoptic measurements of the spatiotemporal distribution of postlarval and juvenile blue crabs .
The project will be conducted during 2002-2003 to take advantage of concurrent postlarval and juvenile sampling supported by another NSF award .
This project will contribute to the understanding of how pelagic dispersal occurs in estuaries that are not dominated by tidal motions , but by irregular or persistent wind-induced motions .
Generalizations of recruitment dynamics from past work on systems with strong tidal signals ( e.g. , Chesapeake and Delaware Bays ) may not accurately characterize patterns of estuarine recruitment in predominantly large , wind-driven systems such as Pamlico Sound .
0221738EisenbergThis is a 12 month project submitted by Dr. Robert Eisenberg , Rush-Presbyterian St. Luke 's Medical Center to request funds for 12 U.S. participants to attend a five-day U.S.-China workshop on introduction of physicists and chemists to ions in protein channels , to be held in Nanjing and Chongqing October 12-18 , 2002 .
This is an interdisciplinary workshop to introduce physicists and chemists to relevant problems in biology .
Bringing these scientists together to focus on problems in a different discipline , with their counterpart researchers from East Asia is a laudable goal .
The NSF provides partial support to the U.S. participants to attend this conference .
The National Science Foundation of China , Nanjing University of Chemical Technology , the Hong Kong University , and the University of Utah also provide support to this workshop .
0221416SoboyejoThis award supports a one-year collaborative project among Professor Winston Soboyejo , at Princeton University ; Professor Aboubaker Beye , at the Universite Cheikh Anta Diop de Dakar , Senegal ; Professor Yunus Ballim , at the University of the Witwatersrand , South Africa ; and Professor Christopher Chama , at the University of Zambia .
The purpose of the grant is to promote research collaborations in materials science and engineering between the United States and Africa .
Nine US universities and one national laboratory will be participating in this program .
Sixteen scientists ( 15 from Africa and one from South America ) will spend nine weeks conducting collaborative research projects at the participating US institutions .
They will conduct research in the following major areas 1 ) failure mechanisms in micro-electro-mechanical systems ; 2 ) processing , characterization and deformation of nano-scale thin films ; 3 ) holistic approaches to infrastructure materials ; and 4 ) the microstructural design of thermal shock resistant refractory ceramics .
The collaborations will continue with reciprocal visits by the US scientists to their African counterparts .
Support is also being provided to assist with the establishment of Africa MRS chapters in North Africa ( Egypt ) , and West Africa ( Nigeria ) .
In addition , US graduate students will gain valuable experience about the process of international collaborative research.This project will also provide assistance for the coordination and/or organization of the following symposia that were proposed at prior NSF-supported workshops 1 ) micro-electro-mechanical systems and thin films ; 2 ) infrastructure materials ; 3 ) affordable materials ; 4 ) low cost manufacturing ; 5 ) biomaterials and biomedical systems ; and 6 ) entrepreneurship in materials .
The symposia will feature talks by US researchers , graduate students and postdoctoral researchers , as well as their counterparts from Africa and South America .
Symposia presentations will be published in special editions of peer-reviewed international journals .
Overviews of the Africa MRS activities will also be presented at the US MRS meetings in Boston and San Francisco.The Office of International Science and Engineering , the Directorate for Engineering , and the Division of Materials Research are jointly providing support for this project .
Using sequence information gathered from the Drosophila Genome Project and Celera/Applied Biosystems , the Drosophila DNA Repair project has identified several paralogs of the yeast Rad51 gene .
These paralogs are thought to promote Rad51-dependent strand exchange during the process of homologous recombinational repair ( HRR ) of DNA damage in cells .
An analysis of hamster cell mutations , coupled with targeted knockout experiments in chicken cells , has shown that these genes play an important role in providing resistance to ionizing radiation and chemical mutagens .
The focus of this research project is the study of DmRad51D and DmXRCC2 and their role in mitotic homologous recombination repair in fruit flies .
The long-term goals include the use of genetic screens to identify other genes that interact with DmRad51D and DmXRCC2 in the process of HRR .
The objectives of the research include 1 ) confirming the functional role of these putative D. melanogaster Rad51 paralogs by assaying functional knockouts in Drosophila culture cells , 2 ) examining the protein-protein interactions among these genes , 3 ) examining the expression pattern of these genes in flies , and 4 ) using P-element excision to generate loss of function mutations in the DmXRCC2 gene .
DNA contains the instructions that allow cells to function correctly .
However , DNA is constantly damaged by chemicals in cells and by radiation such as UV or gamma rays .
Cells with damaged DNA do not always work properly and aberrations can result .
A large group of genes repairs damaged DNA .
This project focuses on the roles of two related genes in DNA repair .
While scientists have some understanding of how these genes work in the test tube or in single cells , they still do not know much about how they work in a whole organism .
This project will use molecular and genetic tools to study the role of these DNA repair genes in the fruit fly , where the activity of these genes can be studied in the entire animal .
Almost all of the genes that fruit flies use during growth and development play an important role in all animals .
This project will not only use the fruit fly to explore questions that are inherently interesting , but will also help to elucidate the function of related genes in other organisms , including humans .
Award is for a multichannel seismic survey across the offshore portions of the Chicxulub impact crater .
The multichannel seismic survey will be added on to a funded British tomographic survey that will be conducted in the summer of 2003 aboard the R/V Maurice Ewing .
The multichannel seismic survey will map features that can not be constrained by the tomographic study , including the geometry of the peak ring , and the possible thrust boundary beneath the peak ring .
The modeling effort , together with the multichannel seismic profiles will determine the approach direction of the impactor and constrain the angle of impact to with 10 degrees .
The multichannel seismic profiles together with the tomographic data will complete the required site survey over two proposed IODP sites .
This award will be used for a new state-of-the-art Nikon microscope with transmitted-reflected light , fluorenscence , phase contrast and Nomarski capabilities for geologic and microbiologic studies .
The scope will also have high-resolution color and black and white digital cameras , and an advanced image analyses system that will allow documentation and analyses of spatially co-registered petrographic and microbiological observaions .
Cost share provided by UW is about 14 % .
The new scope is needed for research focused on the linkages among geological and microbiological processes within submarine environments .
Fundamental to understanding these complex systems is the ability to make detailed , integrated , microbiological observations in the context of the rocks that host these unique communities .
This dissertation investigates the rise of racial profiling as a political issue in the civil rights movement .
The history is seen as an instance of how groups use cultural tools in political conflict .
The results will demonstrate that politics are profoundly cultural and culture is often profoundly political .
The research analyzes the cultural framing process in public discourse through a systematic content analysis of newspapers , TV news , legislation , legal arguments , and judicial decisions .
Interviews with key leaders will help reveal how deliberate cultural strategies were developed to mobilize opposition to racial profiling .
Environmental genomics , wherein the total genomic diversity of a natural community may be sampled and analyzed in an ecological context , remains an elusive goal .
This is due , at least in part , to ( I ) a lack of reliable estimates of total community diversity and ( II ) a lack of information regarding the exact phylogenetic , genomic and ecological units measured by commonly used diversity estimators .
Although ribosomal RNA approaches have provided the first steps towards diversity estimation , and are widely used as a proxy for unique bacterial types in natural populations , the genomic unit a ribotype measures remains largely unexplored .
It is generally believed that ribotype is a poor indicator of ecotype because its slow molecular clock does not track many other genomic changes that are significant with respect to physiological functions and ecological roles .
Further , there are reasons to believe microbes in typical natural environments encounter forces much different from those that shape genome evolution among the cultivated opportunists and pathogens that predominate in genomic studies .
This project is using an approach that will allow the systematic sampling of environmental genomes by capturing large gene fragments anchored to ribosomal genes ( the current standard biomarker for diversity estimation ) as well as methods by which this approach can be extended to reassembling larger genome regions of uncultivated bacteria .
The goals of this investigation are 1 ) to estimate total ribotype diversity in a coastal marine environment taking into account new developments in understanding of PCR artifacts and new statistical approaches toward estimating sampling coverage , 2 ) to explore the relationship of ribotype diversity to genome diversity by sampling sequences contiguous to rRNA genes in abundant ribotypes , 3 ) to explore the mechanisms that may contribute to shaping genomes in natural communities , and 4 ) to continue development of methods to automate and extend the reach of genomic research in natural communities .
This research will provide ( I ) boundaries for bacterial diversity estimates in the environment and ( II ) insights into how processes that are important in shaping the structure and dynamics of microbial communities may also be influential in shaping the evolution of microbial genomes .
P.I .
Widder , Edith ( Harbor Branch Oceanographic Inst .
) Proposal # 0221097The PIs propose to upgrade the Low Light Auto-Radiometer ( LoLAR ) .
LoLAR is a submersible , radiometrically calibrated detector that was developed with joint funding from NSF and ONR .
It is currently deployed on the Johnson- Sea-Link submersible , down to depths of 1000 m to measure downwelling irradiance with respect to the vertical distribution and migration patterns of mesopelagic organisms , as well as to make in situ measurements of bioluminescence .
LoLAR combines the high quantum efficiency of a photomultiplier tube with a solid-state autocalibration circuit .
The funds requested would be used to redesign LoLAR based on a proven auto-calibration concept , using recent technological developments that make it possible to greatly reduce the cost , size , and complexity of the system with the intent of developing a versatile instrument that can be made accessible to a wider range of users .
Interdomain routing performs the critical function of gluing together individual pieces of the Internet topology to create a connected data delivery infrastructure .
Today this critical function is performed by the Border Gateway Protocol ( BGP ) [ rfc1771 ] which establishes reachability information among Autonomous Systems ( ASes ) .
However despite its importance , current measurements and analysis have not led to a basic understanding of BGP 's dynamics , performance under stress , fundamental weaknesses , and potential breaking points ( if any ) .
Although a few data collection points have been set up in the last few years [ ipe , routeviews ] , the routing data collected by these measurement points are mixed with measurement artifacts [ ftntalk ] , thus the data do not necessarily reflect the protocol 's behavior in actual operation .
In order for the Internet to continue its unprecedented growth , the interdomain routing protocol must continue to evolve to meet ever increasing and sometimes contradictory requirements .
There is a general belief that the current BGP routing protocol may be unable to meet its new requirements ( for instance , accomodating the sharp increase in use of site multi-homing , which keeps routing tables from optimally small sizes [ hustonscale2001 ] ) .
BGP is generally thought to be reaching the end of its useful lifetime , although this has not been validated by analysis or measurements [ nimrod , irtfrr , huitemaipng , hustonscale2001 ] .
Due to the lack of a shared understanding of the problem and lack of sufficient data and analysis , there is no consensus on where/when BGP collapses and what ( if anything ) should be done .
To address the above critical questions facing interdomain routing , the researchres have assembled a team with research and operational experience , and expertise in network protocols , algorithms , modeling and analysis .
The resarchers have identified the following fundamental technical requirements that the global routing must meet it must scale in order to handle the growth ( both in the number of users and in the richness of connectivity ) ; security and resilience are critical issues , so it must continue to function in face of ever increasing faults and attacks ; it must be able to fully utilize the rich Internet connectivity ; and it must both allow network operators to apply various policy constraints and implementors to easily extend the protocol 's functionality when needed .
Based on the above criteria the researchers propose to tackle the challenge with the following 3 steps .
( 1 ) Develop measurement methodologies and collect data necessary to understand the current BGP operation , its overhead , dynamics under stress , potential vulnerabilities , inadequacies in functionality .
The research will base this measurement effort on precise requirements that is identiied as lacking in existing data , such as for the data not to be collected over vulnerable multihop links [ ftntalk ] .
A new effort at University of Oregon , separate from this proposal , is the measurement companion , if funded .
( 2 ) Guided by our measurement and analysis , evaluate several proposed design approaches , including meeting the requirements by tinkering with BGP , by a NIMROD-like [ nimrod ] maps-approach , by two different approaches to handling multihoming scalability , and by a Clean Slate approach of a complete BGP replacement .
Each of these approaches emphasizes different aspects of the interdomain routing problem .
The researchers believe there are fundamental trade-offs between many of the desired technical requirements and that these trade-offs are currently not well understood .
The combination of measurement and rigorous analysis with a team including operations expertise will bring these trade-offs into clear view .
( 3 ) Based on the data analysis and design evaluations the researchers will produce a final approach as the recommendation for moving forward .
Through iterations of the above steps , the proposed research undertaking is expected to produce new understanding of current interdomain routing operations , their dynamics and resilience ( or lack of it ) , and vulnerabilities ; a new analysis will also be produced that draws on direct and intensive measurement and operations knowledge to capture the fundamental trade-offs among interdomain routing requirements ; and a conclusion will be reached on how to meet the future Internet 's interdomain routing needs .
This IGERT award will support the establishment of a multidisciplinary graduate training program of education and research at UCSB in the broad field of interactive digital multimedia .
The objective of the program is to train students in a truly interdisciplinary approach to digital multimedia , while preparing them for careers in industry , research , and education .
The convergence of digital media , computing , and communication has created new and exciting opportunities in science , engineering , and the arts .
The goal of this program is to integrate multiple , diverse approaches to the creation , analysis , deployment , and utilization of digital media within a coherent educational framework of training and research .
This multidisciplinary endeavor necessitates collaboration between students and faculty from a broad spectrum of backgrounds and perspectives , including computer science , electrical and computer engineering , psychology , geography , design , composition , and art .
Through innovative and interdepartmental courses and seminars , opportunities for internships in industry , and guidance by faculty from several departments , students will gain a unique perspective on interactive multimedia , including the creation , encoding , and distribution of multimedia content , as well as applications of multimedia systems in education , communication , and arts and entertainment .
Areas of focus for research and education include image , video , and audio processing , networking , human-computer interaction , graphics and visualization , visual arts , interactive media , and computer music .
The graduate training program will emphasize a broad background in several of these areas , while research projects , interactive installations and artistic performances will bring together small , interdisciplinary teams of researchers with diverse expertise .
The IGERT-supported program will leverage existing strengths at UCSB in related areas and will involve the participation of several departments .
The program will complement the UCSB Media Arts and Technology Program , a masters-level graduate program , by enabling doctoral students from several departments to build upon the current foundation it provides.IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical , professional , and personal skills needed for the career demands of the future .
The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries .
In the fifth year of the program , awards are being made to twenty-one institutions for programs that collectively span the areas of science and engineering supported by NSF .
In many parts of the developing world , societies that traditionally engaged in pastoralism , small-field farming , and other livelihoods that had relatively minor impacts on the natural environment have been adopting more modern forms of economic activity , often with more profound impacts on natural systems .
With these changes , the need has grown to better understand how biodiversity and other qualities of the natural environment can be maintained in landscapes being impacted more significantly by humans .
This Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement project will investigate the interplay between cultivation and conservation along one of the most important remaining wildlife corridors in Northern Tanzania 's Tarangire Region .
These corridors are used by several large species to reach fertile rainy season pastures east of Tarangire National Park .
The region is also undergoing social and land-use change as pastoral Maasai adopt cultivation and engage in mixed farming methods .
It is hypothesized that constraints to production vary across both the social and physical landscapes .
The research will determine which constraints most strongly impact cultivation decisions , the relationships between landscape structure and agricultural change in the corridor area , and the way that changing land use alters vegetation composition and habitat structure .
Responses to constraints may impact long term sustainability and resilience by reducing effort to counteract other constraints to higher yields .
Changes will be reflected spatially in the pattern of species composition and in the temporal pattern of field establishment , fallowing , and abandonment .
Methodologies from the natural and social sciences will be used within a landscape ecology framework .
Participant observation and social surveys will be used to understand food production strategies of Maasai .
A cluster sampling design using the boma ( a group of households that live as a unit , sharing herding and sometimes cultivation decisions ) will be used to interview households .
Constraints to cultivation will be measured through survey of crop losses to predation , disease , and drought as well as soil analysis .
Vegetation sampling will examine the physical impact of cultivation across the landscape , verifying verbal responses .
The vegetation of a nearby village with a less developed cultivation system will also be surveyed and both will be compared to available surveys from the 1970s .
This village will provide a baseline for water table and climate driven changes in vegetation composition.This project will provide valuable insights into the processes through which natural systems are impacted by human activity as well as the processes through which people experiencing change monitor and respond to environmental change .
These insights will have significant utility both for academic discourse and for land and resource managers in this region and elsewhere .
The broader impacts of the research include contributing to knowledge of how pastoralists diversify their economies , while adding ecological data to the impact of changes on natural resources .
This research will also enhance the integration of social and natural science data within the context of landscape ecology .
As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award , this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research career .
ABSTRACTModern marine stromatolites are a highly organized , yet compact ecosystem that is uniquely appropriate for studies of coupled biosphere-geosphere interactions .
Results from recently funded NSF research indicate that these living examples of Earth 's oldest macrofossi s form by repeated transitions among three distinct microbial communities , whose predominance appears to be driven by interactions between microbial population dynamics , biogeochemical cycling , and mineral deposition .
The compact nature of this ecosystem allows components to be sampled , experimentally manipulated , and modeled , such that the sensitivity of the system to internal and external perturbations can be evaluated and biogeochemical cycling and minera formation can be quantified .
It is thus an ideal model system for investigating functional linkages between microbes , minerals , and the environment and for addressing fundamental questions such as what is the role of biodiversity in biogeochemical processes and what are the effects of geochemical processes on species richness ? how do microorganisms modify and adapt to their abiotic environment ?
what constrains a seemingly 'equilibrium 'state and what are the forces that produce ecosystem transitions ?
The proposed research will use diverse but highly complementary methodologies to investigate the complexity of the stromatolite ecosystem over spatial scales ranging from single cells ( m ) to kilometers and temporal scales ranging from minutes to seasonal and multi-annual .
The program adopts a powerful approach to the investigation of linkages between 'populations processes and products ' through integration of field studies ofnatural systems , experimental studies , and quantitative modeling .
Our studies of microbial populations will focus on composition , abundance , and distribution of species in four main functional groups ( cyanobacteria , aerobic heterotrophs , sulfate reducers , and sulfide oxidizers ) using a variety of techniques including 16S rDNA , Terminal Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism analysis , and fluorescent in situ hybridization coupled to confocal microscopy .
A combination of field measurements and flume experiments will determine the response of populations , metabolic rates , and chemical gradients to variations in hydrodynamic conditions , sedimentation and light ; chemical gradients will be measured in situ using microelectrodes .
As exopolymeric secretions ( EPS ) are likely to regulate mass transport and so the exchange within the stromatolites , EPS structure and composition will be measured using a variety of techniques , including Fourier-Transform Infrared and Raman spectroscopies , atomic force microscopy , and GC-MS ; solute flux will be measured using benthic chambers .
Effects of EPS properties and elemental cycling on mineral deposition will be determined through construction of C , O and S budgets , complemented by studies of Ca 2+ binding , microscopy analyses to define micrometer-scale relationships between activities and microstructure , and culture studies of precipitation by species .
Flume and field studies will determine critical erosion thresholds and erosion rates of emergent macrostructures .
Finally , we will look for 'fingerprints'of microbial and environmental processes preserved in the rock record through analyses of stable isotopes , morphometric parameters , and intracrystalline organic matter .
Ultimately , a full understanding of the stromatolite system will rely on development of quantitative models.Three separate modeling approaches , which relate to different aspects of the stromatolite ecosystem , will be developed - ( 1 ) a diagenetic model , which will quantify elemental cycles ; ( 2 ) a simulation model , which will quantify the interactions between elemental cycles , populations of microbes and community status in the stromatolite and ( 3 ) a stage-based matrix model , which will attempt to relate environmental components to the distribution of , and transitions among , the microbial assemblages at the level of the ecosystem .
These models will serve as critical tools for understanding the reciprocal interactions between elemental cycles , microbial populations , and sedimentation in past , present , and future environments on earth and beyond.Educational activities that foster the integration of education and multidisciplinary research will include ( 1 ) active participation of undergraduates , graduate students , and postdoctoral associates in field and lab studies , and an international student exchange program ( 2 ) expansion and maintenance of the RIBS public web site ; and ( 3 ) a field guide to Bahamian stromatolites for the general public .
Participation by four European scientists will establish global networks for continuing collaborative studies in the emerging field of geomicrobiology .
The objective of the proposed research is to develop the chemistry and techniques for the application of duplex wear resistant and anti-stiction coatings ; onto polysilicon MEMS based structures from aqueous media .
The anti-stiction properties will be evaluated through a characterization of the hydrophobicity of the coated surfaces under different temperature and humidly conditions .
Friction and wear properties of the deposited coatings will be investigated using friction force microscopy .
By working in collaboration with Sandia National Laboratories , a GOALI partner in the proposed research , coatings will be applied to test structures and the wear between coated surfaces will be measured using a microtribometer device .
Using atomistic computer simulation methods , viz .
molecular dynamics , the relation between the chemical structure of coatings and their friction/wear properties will be explored .
Designing anti-stiction and wear resistant coating begins with linking molecular structures , coating structure and morphology to film properties .
Objectives of molecular level simulations are to understand the evolution of the coating structure during sliding as well as shedding light on the tribo-chemical processes in the anti-stiction film under dynamic rubbing conditions .
The modeling work is driven by a need to compare simulated friction and wear properties of anti-stiction coating with experimental observations and gaining further insight into the physics and chemistry at scales inaccessible by experiments.The research project will provide educational and research opportunities to graduate , undergraduate and post-doctoral students .
The principal investigators of the research program have a strong history of involving underrepresented minority and female students in their research program through regular and REU research programs .
The results from this work will be used to enhance the content of courses in applied surface chemistry and atomistic computation techniques taught in the department of Materials Science and Engineering as well as a teaching module for use in an IC fabrication class taught at the University of Arizona .
This project seeks to combine fieldwork with a systematic review of the published literature to define environmental governance ostensibly , identify its underlying normative principles , clarify exactly what the key-words , such as democracy , and sustainability mean operationally , and lay down criteria to measure the success of developmental schemes that embrace the environmental governance model .
It also seeks to analyze what it takes to re-tool state expert communities and institutionalize a new set of practices and procedures in state bureaucracies .
Moreover , it seeks to discover what is entailed in scaling up technological and institutional design that have been successful in micro contexts to larger scales , or to transfer successful models across cultural contexts .
Last , but by no means the least , it seeks to address the question of conflict resolution how , in the process of engendering such paradigmatic change and institutionalize environmental governance are the inevitable political conflicts to be negotiated at various levels of state bureaucracies and technocracies ?
Research will focus on three sectors forests and biodiversity , water , and renewable energy , in India , which offers a large number of case studies in the context of a vibrant democracy .
Combining the insights of Political Ecology and Science and Technology Studies , the proposed program aims to be a landmark analysis of the environmental governance paradigm , provide a path breaking study of the role of expertise in the environment and development in the third world , and thereby add to the theoretical understanding of democracy and technology .
This project proposes an investigation of the performance and continued viability of BGP system , including development of new techniques for correlating massive volumes of routing and topology data and tools to support modeling and prediction of routing behavior .
The research will include evaluation of incongruity between topology and articulated routing policy , and modeling of peering policy dynamics .
ES-0221390Charles BidwellRobert PetrinUniversity of ChicagoThis Doctoral Dissertation Improvement project examines ways in which post-secondary educational institutions ( PSEIs ) contribute to stratification of technical personnel in the contemporary American economy .
Among the specific questions it seeks to address are ( 1 ) do PSEIs that science and engineering graduates attend have pervasive effects on subsequent occupational outcomes , and ( 2 ) does the functional differentiation among science and engineering graduates reflect differences in their social backgrounds and the regional clustering of technologies and industries .
In order to shed light on these questions this research will develop a framework for embedding post secondary educational institutions in labor market analyses by providing a description of labor markets and career structures segmented by relations between PSEIs and regions.Several post-industrial trends have led to the re-evaluation of structuralist concepts from economics and sociology and contributed to a resurgent interest in theories of labor market segmentation .
The role of regions and education in science and engineering suggests that PSEIs might play a role in structuring labor markets .
Indeed , prior research on science and engineering has found that rewards in technical subsystems are often products of institutions ' positions in networks of information and resource exchanges .
Therefore , in the proposed research the structure of science and engineering practice is posited as manifest , at the individual-level , in the distribution of individuals from various social backgrounds and with various educational credentials across fields and functional roles in the economy .
At the college and university-level , the structure of practice is believed to be manifest in enduring relationships between PSEIs and other key actors in their environments which shape the opportunities available to graduates over the course of their careers.The primary data for this research will be drawn from selected national data on college graduates collected by the Nations Science Foundation ( i.e. , Scientists and Engineers Statistical Data System and Survey of Earned Doctorates ) .
These data will be matched to a number of other sources to generate a composite data set linking science and engineering graduates to relevant information on the PSEIs they attended , as well as economic data on regional and sectoral conditions believed to be correlated with labor market processes .
Since employer characteristics play important roles in determining returns to education , it will be necessary to collect and include these types of supplementary data in analysis , as well as data on PSEIs ' relationships with key actors in their environments .
Analysis will consist of two major phases .
The first will provide a description of PSEIs ' positions in labor markets .
The second will examine individuals ' functional roles in the economy as correlates of their socioeconomic background and characteristics of their degree granting institutions .
Career trajectories will be similarly analyzed using appropriate methods for multicohort data .
'Female choice ' is a form of sexual selection well documented at the level of precopulatory choice and helps to explain many male traits ( e.g .
peacock feathers ) .
After or during copulation , however , females may differentially influence the fate of ejaculate from two or more males to affect paternity outcomes .
This phenomenon , referred to as 'cryptic female choice ' ( CFC ) , is currently under intense investigation because 1 ) it adds a new dimension to the evolutionary conflict between the sexes , and 2 ) it changes our views on the degree to which females influence male reproductive success .
This study examines the relationship between two species of tephritid flies with divergent mating systems and the potential for female influence on sperm use and storage .
One species mates infrequently and has a complex courtship behavior , whereas the other species mates frequently and has minimal courtship behavior .
CFC is predicted to be more important in species that exhibit multiple matings with little pre-copulatory choice .
This study uses a multi-pronged approach to estimate the presence and degree of female influence on reproductive outcomes by examining sperm storage , mating behavior , neuromuscular control , and paternity outcomes in relation to male characters .
0221443LeesThis award will support a workshop in Chapel Hill North Carolina to address problems associated with the subduction of the Nazca Plate below South America along the Northern Andes .
The purpose of the workshop is to develop a science plan and to organize and coordinate the diverse research objectives of the NASCAR ( Northern Andes Subduction of the Carnegie Ridge ) initiative .
The NASCAR initiative involves researchers from a broad range of earth science ( Geology , Geophysics , Geochemistry , Geodynamics ) and coordination of goals and field logistics is critical to the success of the program .
0221516 PrimeauThe purpose of this project is to test the hypothesis that the observed variability is a manifestation of intrinsic variability associated with the transitions between multiple equilibria .
To do this the investigators will apply the recently developed methods of numerical bifurcation analysis to a hierarchy of ocean models with increasing realism to compute the solution branches found in the simpler model .
The following clear criteria will be tested .
If they are not met , the hypothesis must be rejected .
1 .
The equilibria with elongated recirculation gyres should be relatively less unstable than the equilibria with elongated gyres to be consistent with the observation that eddy activity decreases during periods of elongated gyres 2 .
The unstable modes associated with elongated recirculation gyres should have amplitude patterns that dominate in the downstream region of the jet , and those for the contracted recirculation gyres should have amplitude patterns that dominate in the upstream region , to be consistent with the observation that the eddy variability moves downstream during elongated states.3 .
The mean zonal path of the jet extension should be further north for equilibria with elongated recirculation gyres to be consistent with the observation that the zonal mean path of the Gulf Stream and Kuroshio Extension moves northward during elongated states.Through this study a Ph.D. student will be trained in ocean modeling and in the application of dynamical systems theory to climate problems .
In addition a software package to do numerical bifurcation analysis of ocean models will be produced and made available to the community .
The possibility that the observed large-scale patterns of low-frequency variability are the result of intrinsic variability is an exciting one because observations show that these current changes are signi ? cant contributors to the maintenance sea surface temperature anomalies and thus could contribute to mid-latitude climate variability .
ABSTRACTAt 80 by 600 microns , Epulopiscium is the largest heterotrophic bacterium that has been identified to date .
It also has the unusual ability to produce multiple live offspring internally .
This project takes an aggressive approach to increase our understanding of the biology of this organism by determining the complete genome sequence , and identifying the unique features of Epulopiscium that have allowed these exceptional bacteria to attain cellular sizes that are orders of magnitude larger than most bacteria .
These analyses will identify genomic and cellular modifications that may have been employed in the progenitor of all eukaryotes as a first step toward the development of the contemporary eukaryotic cell .
Comparative analyses with the complete genome sequences of endospore-forming bacteria will identify sporulation gene homologues in the Epulopiscium genome that can serve as targets of future analyses to determine the role of these genes in intracellular offspring production .
Finally , this project will generate a physiological profile of Epulopiscium sp .
based on the complete genome sequence .
This component will address how the normal environment of this species ( the guts of surgeonfish ) may have enabled the evolution of these life-style novelties , and serve as a framework for developing culture media to grow Epulopiscium in the laboratory so that more detailed experiments on this species can be conducted .
Collaborations , discussions , and data exchange with both domestic and international groups that are studying Epulopiscium biology , spore-forming bacteria , and extremely large bacteria will be encouraged .
Training and educational workshops will be held at The Institute for Genomic Research ( TIGR ) in Rockville , Maryland for these biologists .
The project team will make every attempt to ensure that underrepresented groups are included in the students and post-doctoral candidates who will be involved for the duration of the proposed study .
Sequence and microarray data will be continuously posted and updated on our public web site ( www.tigr.org ) .
A fundamental challenge among all multicellular eukaryotes is coordinating the expression of critically important genes in different cells throughout development to produce a fully functional adult .
This coordination is accomplished by short-range inductive signals between cells that rely on diffusible peptides and/or direct cell contacts to initiate intracellular signaling cascades that ultimately influence the expression of specific target genes .
Chromatin has emerged as one of the primary obstacles with which the cell 's transcription and replication machinery must contend .
Factors necessary to transcribe or replicate DNA must gain access to regulatory sites that are packaged into nucleosomes and higher order structures .
This is especially problematic when cells are in mitosis and chromatin is extremely condensed .
Energy dependent chromatin remodeling complexes have evolved to locally decondense regions to assist in factor binding .
The best studied of these complexes is the highly conserved SWI/SNF complex , found in yeast , flies and mammals , that is required for the activation of many , but not all genes .
These complexes are very large ( ~2-MDa ) and are composed of 8-11 polypeptides .
Recent work with the purified yeast and mammalian complexes has elucidated many of the biochemical properties involved in chromatin remodeling ; though many aspects regarding the in vivo biological functions are unclear .
For example , while only one subunit has any identified catalytic activity , the remaining subunits are necessary for full in vivo function , modulating the complex activities or targeting it to specific genes or processes .
Significant questions remain , such as why so many subunits and how do they individually contribute to the functions of the complex ?
Do any of the subunits have roles independent of the complex ?
Also , the complex appears to influence gene regulation both positively and negatively ( activation and repression ) .
How is this accomplished and is the regulation direct or indirect ?
What are the in vivo targets of the complex and how are they selected ?
Drosophila offers an ideal system for examining these questions , with the full array of genetic , biochemical and cell biological tools available , including a completed genome sequence and a wealth of existing mutations .
Drosophila research also provides a detailed developmental framework to bridge these disciplines.This project utilizes molecular , genetic and biochemical analysis of the Drosophila SWI/SNF complex , known as the Brahma ( BRM ) complex to address these questions .
The efforts are focused on one of the most highly conserved and critically important components , known as SNR1 .
This subunit is crucial in both flies and humans for coordinating or targeting specific protein interactions between the complex and a variety of transcription factors and cell cycle regulatory proteins .
A recently isolated temperature sensitive snr1 mutant allows for conditional removal of snr1 function , and the project takes full advantage of this property to fully characterize the biological requirements for SNR1 during development .
This is especially important as the snr1 gene is essential in flies and loss of its human counterpart has been strongly correlated with aggressive childhood cancers .
In addition to genetic and biochemical studies , DNA microarray analyses using RNA isolated from homozygous mutants at the restrictive temperature will be used to gain a much needed view of the range of targets of the complex in higher eukaryotes , setting the stage for a full investigation of how those targets are selected and regulated in developing tissues .
The broader impact of the research is that , through the use of a conditional mutation that is unique among the metazoan SWI/SNF complexes , the biological significance of chromatin remodeling in developmental processes can be better defined by examining in detail when and where the complex is required , and for what functions .
This project will improve understanding of terrestrial carbon sinks by linking process-level biological information obtained for individual plants or ecosystems over short time scales with observations and models that characterize the large spatial domain and long time scales of regional and global concern .
The P.I .
will obtain comprehensive observations and use archived data integrated across several spatial and temporal scales , including tower and aircraft flux measurements and forest biomass inventories , to develop an integrated ecosystem-atmosphere model that captures both slow and fast ecosystem processes .
The combined results will provide quantitative constraints to the carbon budget at regional scales .
The integrated model will be optimized using atmospheric and biospheric data that quantitatively link properties of the terrestrial biosphere-atmosphere system with the underlying fundamental biological and physical processes .
The project has an outreach program that includes an interactive CD-ROM with information on the carbon cycle and climate change and a module for having students conduct hypothesis testing using project data .
Since 1991 NOAA/PMEL has monitored seismicity in the NE Pacific using Navy SOSUS arrays , and since 1966 using an autonomous hydrophone array in the equatorial Pacific .
This project is an effort to use analyze these data to address questions related to the first-order patterns in seismicity , stress transfer and earthquake interactions .
For many decades , a fundamental tenant of development economics is that developing countries have great difficulty becoming creators of technology .
This assumption has been based on the belief that multinational corporations ( MNCs ) function according to a locational hierarchy of global innovation networks , with intellectual activities located in more advanced countries while routine production is situated in developing countries .
Empirical evidence indicates that these traditional assumptions no longer are viable .
In recent years , many world-class MNCs now are locating advanced research and development ( R & D ) centers in Shanghai and Beijing , China .
This trend is typified by Microsoft 's establishment of its first academic-style R & D center in Beijing in 1998 , three years before it established a similar center in Silicon Valley in 2001 .
Once principally a routine production site , China appears to have become a center of excellence in global innovation networks .
This advanced type of MNC activity represents not only an important turning point in China 's development but a possible harbinger of developments that may occur in other large developing countries , thereby transforming the processes of globalization and economic development .
This doctoral dissertation research project will examine the processes that have been evident in China .
The focal questions of the project are Why are MNCs locating their R & D centers in developing countries like China ?
How can a developing country like China integrate itself at the highest level of global innovation networks ?
An ancillary question to be examined is Why have MNC R & D centers tended to concentrate in Beijing ( a highly controlled political city ) rather than Shanghai ( a commercialized global city ) ?
The doctoral candidate will conduct case studies of a set of MNCs that have established R & D centers in China .
She will conduct surveys of company officials , and she will undertake statistical analyses of economic data.This project will contribute to the understanding of how developing cities become integrated into global innovation networks .
This study will consider the increasingly important role of global ( exogenous ) factors in the study of knowledge-based development of city-regions .
Moreover , it will explore the thesis a developing nation 's strategy for knowledge-based economic development no longer should rely solely on local and national ( endogenous ) factors .
This project will consider the relationship of local , national , and global variables , especially in developing countries or transitional economies .
Among the broader impacts of the project are practical insights regarding how cities and regions can mobilize its knowledge assets ( human capital , specialized industrial clusters , local business networks , enabling industrial policies , and/or skilled labor policies ) to bargain with both the central government and the MNCs to improve its competitiveness in the global economy .
Understanding the current direction of extensions of global innovation networks and the ways in which cities and regions can cultivate and capitalize on these processes will provide policy makers and investors alike with the tools necessary to support and maintain more dynamic forms of economic growth .
As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award , this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research career .
Increasing our understanding of sea ice dynamics is vital because of the role sea ice plays in global atmospheric and ocean dynamics .
In particular , the ability to better predict the opening of cracks in the ice , or leads , will improve our understanding of the Earth 's weather , climate and ecology , as well as our ability to navigate Artic waters .
Existing ice models have been of limited usefulness for forecasting the location and orientation of new leads and make no attempt to calculate the degree to which any given lead will open for predicted , or even observed forcing conditions .
Even if effective models existed , until recently , there have been no data available for verification .
We propose research that will exploit two significant developments and will ultimately allow accurate predictions of lead opening and orientation .
First , motion of material points on large-scale regions of the Arctic ice cover have been recorded and are now available for complete winter seasons .
Second , theoretical and numerical procedures have been recently developed for describing crack formation through the use of cohesive crack models .
The proposed research is to develop a multi-scale , computational procedure to predict crack initiation , orientation , and width , in sea ice , under an observed set of loading conditions , and to verify the procedure using the newly available data .
The successful completion of the research will set the stage for the next generation of models and numerical procedures in which realistic geophysical forces can be used to predict the detailed behavior of the Arctic ice cover.For the first time , large-scale motion data are available for points on the Artic ice cover .
This unique dataset , produced by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory ( JPL ) , is derived from high-resolution , spaceborn , Synthetic Aperature Radar ( SAR ) imagery , acquired by the RADARSAT satellite .
These data are exactly what is needed to form a complete picture of ice deformation .
A striking aspect of these images is linear features indicating the formation of leads , or openings in the sea ice .
The ability to better predict the opening of leads will improve our understanding of the Earth 's weather , climate and ecology , as well as our ability to navigate Artic waters .
Existing ice models have been of limited usefulness for forecasting the location and orientation of new leads and make no attempt to calculate the degree to which any given lead will open for predicted , or even observed forcing conditions .
Even if effective models existed , until recently , there have been no data available for verification .
We propose to use the JPL data to develop and verify new material models for sea ice in order to predict crack initiation , orientation , and width .
The successful completion of the research will set the stage for the next generation of models and numerical procedures in which realistic geophysical forces can be used to predict the detailed behavior of the Arctic ice cover .
Moreover , sea ice is a central element in the Earth 's climate system .
An accurate ice model will benefit our ability to understand past climatic variability and to improve predictive capabilities through its inclusion in global ocean and climate models .
Due to an increase in population and economic development along the coast , our society is increasingly exposed to natural hazards including hurricanes and tornadoes .
Every year these hazards cause many fatalities and injuries ; major disruption in community lifelines such as power , communication and transportation ; and large amounts of property damage .
The events of September 11 , 2001 , showed us that man-made hazards are likely to be part of our lives .
Since , such natural and man-made hazards are unpredictable , we can curb losses through careful planning , effective public policies , and good engineering .
The objective of this IGERT program is to produce a cadre of professionals prepared for broader multidisciplinary research , comprehensive planning and balanced decision-making in the future .
This objective will be met by integrating graduate research and training in a program that crosses the disciplines of atmospheric science , engineering , and economics leading to an interdisciplinary doctoral degree .
The focus of the program is wind science and engineering and associated economics/risk management .
Scientist and engineers at Texas Tech University have pursued wind-related research since 1970 when a devastating tornado struck near the university and destroyed much of downtown Lubbock .
Over the past three decades the research program has continued to grow in the areas of building response and design , the atmospheric boundary layer and economics/risk management .
With close to twenty faculty members participating in the program , a variety of research projects are in progress at a given time .
Some of the research areas are wind characteristics in tornadoes and landfalling hurricanes , post-disaster investigation of building damage and economic losses , deign criteria for shelters , full-scale building response in the field , wind tunnel studies , simulation of damage , forecast for wind power , hurricane evacuation and others .
NSF IGERT Fellows will take core courses in atmospheric sciences , wind-related engineering , economic/risk management , ethics and GIS .
The fellows will also be trained through a rotation of three laboratory courses in meteorological measurement , wind-related engineering experimentation and statistical analysis of random phenomena .
A one-semester internship in a national laboratory , industrial organization or governmental agency is part of the program .
This training along with selected courses in a specific discipline will prepare the Fellows to pursue multidisciplinary research in wind science and engineering .
The goal is to complete a Ph.D. degree in four to five years after completion of the bachelors degree.IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical , professional , and personal skills needed for the career demands of the future .
The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries .
In the fifth year of the program , awards are being made to twenty-one institutions for programs that collectively span the areas of science and engineering supported by NSF .
This award is for an add-on to a funded field program to investigate the incipient rift located on the east side of the East Pacific Rise at 2 degrees 40'N by E. Klein and D. Smith ( 0099154 ) .
This incipient rift is volcanically active and may provide the unique opportunity of sampling the melting regime under the EPR with increasing distance from the axis .
This add-on would carry out theoretical modeling of the upwelling and melting reime in order to improve understanding of the melt production and migration bvelow the EPR .
The PI will work with M. Spiegelman to modify existing 2D mantle flow and melt models to include the incipient rift .
After that , 3D models will be developed and tested against geochemical data .
DMS-0138445Denis ZorinDMS-0221666Mathieu DesbrunDMS-0220905Peter SchroderThis is a collaborative project funded by the CARGO program underDMS-0138445 , DMS-0221666 , and DMS-0220905.Accurate computational representations of complex geometry are of great importance in many disciplines ranging from engineering and manufacturing to medicine and biology .
With the wide availability of powerful computational resources and ever better acquisition technologies such as 3D laser scanning and volumetric MRI or CAT imaging the geometries used in applications are becoming increasingly complex .
One aspect of this complexity is topology , i.e. , the presenceof holes and tunnels and of a network of one and zero-dimensional surface features such as creases and spikes .
Typical examples of topologically complex shapes are a perforated plate or the system of blood vessels of the body .
Traditional representations of geometry are at worst weak and at best cumbersome and inefficient in representingsuch complex topologies .
Modeling of macro- and microscopic biological structures is becoming increasingly important for medical research , training , and treatment support .
Such structures often have extremely complex shape and topology ( e.g. , the blood vessel or the nervous system , facialmuscles , a folded protein molecule ) .
The representations and algorithms we develop will result in new efficient ways of manipulating and processing computer representations of such structures .
In this project a team with expertise in numerical analysis , geometric modeling , discrete algorithms and computer graphics is studying ways to bring fundamental mathematical tools and highly efficient algorithms to bear on the challenge of creating efficient and accurate computational representations and algorithms for surfaces of complextopology .
In particular we are investigating theory and practical algorithms for ( I ) removal of topological noise in existing models as well as in raw data used for surface reconstruction ; ( II ) topology discovery in volumetric data sets ; ( III ) construction of multiresolution representations of geometry which can meaningfullyabstract fine level topology at coarser resolutions to enable powerful multiscale techniques for rendering , modification and simulation .
Particular attention is paid to exploring measures of topological scale which are crucial to most of the algorithms being developed .
The algorithms to be developed by the team will have immediate applications in two areas Computer-Aided Design and Medical Visualization .
In CAD , examples of potential applications include topology cleanup , simplification for integration of scanned 3D data with manually constructed models and use of multiscale representations for interactive conceptual design representations .
Lay Summary Experience plays an important role in the development , maintenance , and modification of the nervous system .
Activity-dependent changes in the nervous system are responsible for the strong effect of early experience on adult behavior and the modifications in behavior ( learning ) that continue throughout life .
A major goal of brain research is to understand how electrical activity influences the properties of individual brain cells ( neurons ) and their interconnections ( synapses ) .
It is very difficult to study single neurons and synapses in the vertebrate brain ; this is much easier in the simpler invertebrate nervous system .
In the crayfish neuromuscular system , single axons ( elongated portion of the neuron ) , which form synaptic connections on the muscle , can be studied in the living animal or in a culture dish .
Here axons with different levels of electrical activity develop differences in synaptic structure and function .
The proposed research examines the activity-dependent development of intracellular calcium ( [ Ca2+ ] i ) regulation and the formation of synaptic structures at the axon terminal both of these are important for the release of neurotransmitter , the signal used at synapses .
The regulation of [ Ca2+ ] i is very important since [ Ca2+ ] i also controls gene regulation , as well as neuronal growth and death .
The developmental effect of electrical activity will be examined by removing the crayfish nerve cord and studying regenerating ( developing ) axons in a culture dish over a period of days .
Pharmacological agents will be used to alter electrical activity , calcium influx , and perturb intracellular signal-transduction pathways .
Calcium regulation will then be examined at the growing tip of the axon ( growth cone ) using fluorescent calcium indicators and electrophysiological techniques , and synaptic structures will be visualized with electron microscopy .
To determine whether similar activity-dependent changes occur in mature axons , the electrical activity of axons will be altered in an intact , adult crayfish , and the axon terminal will again be examined .
Findings from these studies will add to our knowledge of the basic mechanisms responsible for nervous system development .
In particular , these results will further define the role of experience in specifying neuronal structure and function , and the range of adaptation of the nervous system to altered use .
Interdomain routing performs the critical function of gluing together individual pieces of the Internet topology to create a connected data delivery infrastructure .
Today this critical function is performed by the Border Gateway Protocol ( BGP ) [ rfc1771 ] which establishes reachability information among Autonomous Systems ( ASes ) .
However despite its importance , current measurements and analysis have not led to a basic understanding of BGP 's dynamics , performance under stress , fundamental weaknesses , and potential breaking points ( if any ) .
Although a few data collection points have been set up in the last few years [ ipe , routeviews ] , the routing data collected by these measurement points are mixed with measurement artifacts [ ftntalk ] , thus the data do not necessarily reflect the protocol 's behavior in actual operation .
In order for the Internet to continue its unprecedented growth , the interdomain routing protocol must continue to evolve to meet ever increasing and sometimes contradictory requirements .
There is a general belief that the current BGP routing protocol may be unable to meet its new requirements ( for instance , accomodating the sharp increase in use of site multi-homing , which keeps routing tables from optimally small sizes [ hustonscale2001 ] ) .
BGP is generally thought to be reaching the end of its useful lifetime , although this has not been validated by analysis or measurements [ nimrod , irtfrr , huitemaipng , hustonscale2001 ] .
Due to the lack of a shared understanding of the problem and lack of sufficient data and analysis , there is no consensus on where/when BGP collapses and what ( if anything ) should be done .
To address the above critical questions facing interdomain routing , the researchres have assembled a team with research and operational experience , and expertise in network protocols , algorithms , modeling and analysis .
The resarchers have identified the following fundamental technical requirements that the global routing must meet it must scale in order to handle the growth ( both in the number of users and in the richness of connectivity ) ; security and resilience are critical issues , so it must continue to function in face of ever increasing faults and attacks ; it must be able to fully utilize the rich Internet connectivity ; and it must both allow network operators to apply various policy constraints and implementors to easily extend the protocol 's functionality when needed .
Based on the above criteria the researchers propose to tackle the challenge with the following 3 steps .
( 1 ) Develop measurement methodologies and collect data necessary to understand the current BGP operation , its overhead , dynamics under stress , potential vulnerabilities , inadequacies in functionality .
The research will base this measurement effort on precise requirements that isidentiied as lacking in existing data , such as for the data not to be collected over vulnerable multihop links [ ftntalk ] .
A new effort at University of Oregon , separate from this proposal , is the measurement companion , if funded .
( 2 ) Guided by our measurement and analysis , evaluate several proposed design approaches , including meeting the requirements by tinkering with BGP , by a NIMROD-like [ nimrod ] maps-approach , by two different approaches to handling multihoming scalability , and by a Clean Slate approach of a complete BGP replacement .
Each of these approaches emphasizes different aspects of the interdomain routing problem .
The researchers believe there are fundamental trade-offs between many of the desired technical requirements and that these trade-offs are currently not well understood .
The combination of measurement and rigorous analysis with a team including operations expertise will bring these trade-offs into clear view .
( 3 ) Based on the data analysis and design evaluations the researchers will produce a final approach as the recommendation for moving forward .
Through iterations of the above steps , the proposed research undertaking is expected to produce new understanding of current interdomain routing operations , their dynamics and resilience ( or lack of it ) , and vulnerabilities ; a new analysis will also be produced that draws on direct and intensive measurement and operations knowledge to capture the fundamental trade-offs among interdomain routing requirements ; and a conclusion will be reached on how to meet the future Internet 's interdomain routing needs .
This IGERT project is an integrated program of education and research in the area of Biogeochemistry and Environmental Biocomplexity .
Conceptual , technical , and computational developments are driving a major convergence among the biological , earth , and physical sciences .
Over the next several decades , this disciplinary convergence will transform understanding of basic processes that control the stability and sustainability of natural environments .
These insights will have extraordinary implications for the ability to predict and manage the effects of modern human activities on the structure and function of ecosystems across local , regional , and global scales .
Such new knowledge is critical in planning for a safe , sustainable , and prosperous future .
The IGERT project goals are to create an environment where researchers from ecology and evolutionary biology , biogeochemistry , environmental engineering , hydrology , environmental microbiology , and materials science come together to create novel interdisciplinary approaches to major questions in environmental science , and to train the next generation of leaders in this new interdisciplinary science .
Emphasis will be on intellectual diversity and non-traditional pedagogies in training students across disciplinary boundaries , while deliberately enhancing connections with international and non-university partners .
Workshop and seminar style learning will be employed , as well as active involvement of students in the management and implementation of the program .
The intellectual foci will be the interaction of biological and physico-chemical controls on the cycling of metals and nutrients , especially terrestrial nitrogen ; the role of microbiological processes in mediating biogeochemical cycling ; and the effects of variation in genotype and phenotype on ecosystem functioning .
Ultimately , the program will consider how complex behavior arises from the interaction of individually simple relationships in natural and managed ecosystems .
Cornell University has outstanding resources in individual disciplines , and the IGERT program offers a unique opportunity to bring together many of these individual efforts into an integrated whole.IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical , professional , and personal skills needed for the career demands of the future .
The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries .
In the fifth year of the program , awards are being made to twenty-one institutions for programs that collectively span the areas of science and engineering supported by NSF .
ABSTRACTThe fish Fundulus heteroclitus is widely distributed in estuaries along the eastern seacoast of North America .
This species is found in areas where there is considerable variation in habitat spatial heterogeneity ( i.e. , landscape complexity ) and in a region characterized by one of the world 's steepest thermal clines approximately 1.0 degree centigrade per degree of latitude .
The goals of this project are to determinehow landscape complexity within a local region and along the steep thermal cline affect genome-wide patterns of gene expression .
Landscape structure is hypothesized to affect population size and genetic structure , and individual growth rates , longevity , and migration .
These parameters in turn alter the process of natural selection and thus affect an organism 's ability to adapt to local conditions .
This project will measure theseecological and population variables and explore their relationships to patterns of gene expression .
Genetic crosses of field-collected populations , and laboratory acclimation of their progeny , will determine if physiological induction or heritable genetic differences are responsible for the differences in gene expression .
Genome-wide patterns of mRNA expression will be quantified with F. heteroclitus microarrays .
Because variation in messenger RNA must be translated into changes in protein concentration to produce a phenotypic change , microarray experiments will be complemented by high-throughput analyses of protein expression ( proteomics ) .
If variation in gene expression is one of the most important adaptive mechanisms , this project will detect significant differences in gene expression associated with differences in landscape and thermal ecology .
This research will determine how ecological factors operating at diverse geographic scales affect the population biology and gene expression of F. heteroclitus .
This is a three-year research project to understand the role of convection in forcing equatorial waves , and the effects of these waves on the dynamics of the middle atmosphere .
The tool to be adopted for this investigation is the National Center for Atmospheric Research 's Whole Atmosphere Climate/Chemistry Model ( WACCM ) , a comprehensive numerical model spanning the range of altitude from the Earth 's surface to the lower thermosphere .
The focus of the project are the equatorial waves , forced in the tropical troposphere by transient convection heating , that propagate upward into the stratosphere , mesosphere , and lower thermosphere .
It is expected that this project will have broad impact on theoretical , numerical and observational aspects of wave propagation , dynamics , and chemical composition of the middle atmosphere .
Francois M. Morel , Ward , Groves , Spiro and Stiefel at Princeton ; Moffett at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute ; Young , and Zylstra at Rutgers ; and Bruland , Butle , and Haygood at The University of California are supported by the Division of Chemistry for their interdisciplinary collaboration aimed at elucidating the molecular mechanisms of the function , fate , and effect of trace elements in the environment .
This award includes collaborations between Princeton , Rutgers and ExxonMobil to work on hydrocarbon degradation , among three University of California campuses , Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute and Rutgers to work on iron and Trichodesmium , and between McGill and Princeton to work on the isolation of metalloenzymes from marine diatoms .
The team will be focusing on the structure and function of important natural metalloenzymes and metal-binding compounds at the molecular level and creating new tools to study them in the environment .
Enhanced understanding of the local and global effects of metals in the environment will lead to a more precise and predictive understanding of and establish the basic knowledge necessary to develop better technologies for pollution control , mitigation and remediation .
The interdisciplinary collaborations between researchers at Princeton , Rutgers , three University of California campuses , the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute and Exxon-Mobil offer unique interdisciplinary training opportunities for the students and postdoctoral researchers involved with this work .
Environmental Molecular Science Institute ( EMSI ) awards are given to interdisciplinary teams of university , industrial and/or national laboratory scientists working on problems aimed at increasing fundamental understanding of natural processes and processes resulting from human activities in the environment at the molecular level .
The emphasis in these awards is on collaborative research among teams with complementary research interests and the creation of broad educational experiences for students .
This project is an application of modern Bayesian hierarchical methods of statistical analysis to the problem of ocean state estimation .
The goal is to use this statistical technique to combine hydrographic data , dynamical constraints , and knowledge about the uncertainties in both observations and dynamical assumptions , to arrive at ( a ) slowly varying maps of oceanic property fields on a selection of isopycnals in the North Atlantic , ( b ) an estimate of the probability distribution function for possible states of the North Atlantic circulation consistent with the available data .
The project unites statisticians and ocean scientists and provides training in interdisciplinary research for a graduate student and two post-doctoral researchers .
This proposal describes an inter-institutional IGERT program in soft materials to be offered jointly at City College of CUNY and Columbia University , which are in close proximity .
De Gennes defines soft materials as organic media that organize on supramolecular length scales via weak associative interactions .
Examples include thin polymeric films for sensors , organic blends for electronic displays , and natural and artificial tissue , spanning the range from complex fluids to soft solids .
They are intrinsically multi-scale , molecular to macroscopic .
A stunning variety of structures and morphologies can emerge , enabling a wide range of new technologies , and all scales impact processing and use .
The Ph.D. program will be built around joint seminars , an industrial internship , collaborative thesis research , and a core of joint course offerings , including two new laboratory courses .
The research will be in three complementary areas effects of confinement on polymer statics and dynamics , chemical and physical patterning , and multi-scale phenomena in bio-related materials .
The proposed core curriculum will be taken in addition to the core disciplinary requirements in the student 's major department .
Our proposal is consistent with existing Ph.D. requirements for all five participating departments , and does not add in any way to the degree requirements or faculty teaching loads ; the soft materials courses will satisfy existing elective requirements , but will enable the students to focus these electives within a coordinated program .
The proposed collaborative program is unique in two respects First , it leverages the intellectual and material resources of two neighboring , urban , public/private institutions with complementary faculty and diverse student bodies .
Second , it creates a unique , synergistic environment for research and graduate education in a niche area that is at the heart of numerous technologies essential to industries based in the greater New York regional area.IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical , professional , and personal skills needed for the career demands of the future .
The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries .
In the fifth year of the program , awards are being made to twenty-one institutions for programs that collectively span the areas of science and engineering supported by NSF .
A 5-day symposium will be convened to explore how biocomplexity controls the sensitivity and stability of tundra systems over decadal time scales .
Experts in the field will be invited to give keynote presentations and participate in appraising existing knowledge and prepare a science plan to identify avenues of research examining the complexity , function and dynamics of tundra systems .
Five themes and primary questions related to climate and the tundra will be addressed across multiple spatial and temporal scales .
This includes drivers of change ; patterns of change ; sensitivity to change ; responses to change ; and implication of change .
This symposium will bring together scientists involved in the North American tundra Experiment ( NATEX ) that is part of a larger network of scientists known as the International Tundra Experiment ( ITEX ) .
The ARCSS program supports ITEX work as part of the Land-Atmosphere-Ice Interactions ( LAII ) component .
To enhance international and student participation , real time video web casting and teleconferencing will take place .
These broadcasts will be forwarded to the Joint Office of Scientific Support for ultimate inclusion in the ARCSS Data Coordination Center .
A synthesis report will be prepared and circulated .
Key personnel identified during the symposium will draft a science plan similar to the LAII science plan and will include an outline for biocomplexity related research in Arctic terrestrial systems .
A manuscript for publication in an appropriate internationally recognized journal is planned .
This project focuses on the synthesis of novel solid-state inorganic materials , including epitaxial growth of device-quality thin-film heterostructures and nanostructures .
These materials will have applications in microelectronics , optoelectronics , and refractory ceramics .
A unique aspect of this effort in materials design and synthesis is the ability to build in precise atomic arrangements primarily via molecular chemistry so as to overcome thermodynamic impediments arising from differences in atomic sizes , electronic level filling and electronegativities of constituent atoms and thereby form new and metastable materials that can not be obtained by conventional routes .
The range of target materials includes ( a ) New semiconductors in the C-Si-Ge-Sn system , which are intended for integration of Si-based microelectronics with optical components ; ( b ) Quaternary wide bandgap optical materials based on covalent carbides and nitrides of the main group ; ( c ) Si based superhard dielectric materials and diamond-like compounds comprising light elements .
The electronic structure , band structure , optical , dielectric , mechanical and structural properties of these materials are thoroughly investigated by experimental as well as theoretical methods .
The work is well suited to provide broad preparation and state-of-the-art skills to undergraduate , graduate and postdoctoral student researchers in synthetic solid-state chemistry and materials science.This research has significant potential for high impact in important areas of national interest including areas such as new optical , semiconducting , and superhard/ultrastrong materials , which are of interest to microelectronics and defense industries .
The research provides fundamental knowledge in novel device chemistry and physics , and thus makes important contributions to emerging and future technologies such as , high-speed computers , full color displays and communication and detection systems .
In addition to significant research and technological accomplishments which include US and international patents , the work provides graduate and postdoctoral training to new generations of scientists and engineers in the preparation and processing of new materials and in the art of chemical vapor deposition , which is a vital field in the microelectronics industry .
Collaborations are ongoing with local industries to develop materials for use in silicon-based high-speed electronic devices as well as new generations of solid-state lighting systems that are energy efficient and environmentally safe .
The group maintains international collaborations and outreach with researchers in Germany , Norway , Mexico , and the Czech Republic .
The Institute on Global Conflict and Cooperation ( IGCC ) , a multi-campus research institute of the University of California , is establishing an IGERT program to train NSF Fellows on Public Policy and Nuclear Threats .
IGCC will use its long-established programs on all nine campuses of the University of California and institutional ties with Lawrence Livermore and Los Alamos National Laboratories to implement this program .
During the Cold War , nuclear threats drove investments and keen young minds into the study of nuclear weapons issues .
Today , the incentive to become experts in nuclear matters is much reduced .
Yet , the nuclear threat has not gone away .
As has been underscored by the events of September 11 , 2001 and their aftermath , it is time to build a new community of scholars and practitioners trained in strategic analysis , nuclear policy issues , the roles of nuclear weapons , the regional and global realities that comprise today 's nuclear threats , and in traditional and prospective responses ranging from arms control to nonproliferation to counter-proliferation .
The principal goals of the program are to attract and train the next generation of strategic thinkers to address the public policy issues of tomorrow about nuclear threats ; to produce new incentives for interdisciplinary research in the field of public policy and nuclear threats ; to provide students with access to organizations and individuals engaged in nuclear policy development at home and abroad ; to develop career opportunities at such organizations for post-doctoral employment ; and , ultimately to provide the expertise the United States needs to develop sound nuclear policies in a changing international environment .
Another important goal is to create an interdisciplinary and intergenerational community of scholars who can learn from one another and create synergies across disciplines that last well beyond this program .
The IGERT program is designed to achieve these goals .
Two groups of approximately ten UC doctoral dissertation students will be chosen by statewide competitive selection , and supported fully for five years each .
IGERT Fellows will be supported for one of these years by their respective UC departments that will provide research or teaching assistantships in nuclear policy-related topics .
IGCC will work with science , social science , and humanities departments to recruit new Ph.D. students for this program .
Applications will be reviewed and Fellows selected by a statewide interdisciplinary subcommittee of the IGCC steering committee .
IGCC , Ph.D. programs on the UC campuses , Lawrence Livermore and Los Alamos National Laboratories , and senior mentors will team to conduct this program .
Students will receive their fundamental Ph.D. education in their home departments ; this education will be enhanced by a series of required IGERT training activities a four-week summer training seminar on the historical and current security implications of nuclear weapons both globally and regionally , including their strategic and political roles , arms control , nonproliferation , missile defense , terrorism , and related technology issues ; a research or teaching assistantship ; two-month summer internship at Lawrence Livermore or Los Alamos National Laboratory ; an overseas fellowship in Asia or Europe ; a summer policy internship at a governmental or non-governmental organization in Washington , DC ; and monthly interdisciplinary video-conferences focused on contemporary research issues surrounding nuclear weapons and public policy .
Where appropriate and possible , additional UC students will be invited to participate in IGERT training activities.IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical , professional , and personal skills needed for the career demands of the future .
The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries .
In the fifth year of the program , awards are being made to twenty-one institutions for programs that collectively span the areas of science and engineering supported by NSF .
This Major Research Instrumentation award to University of California at San Diego provides funds for developments that will improve the capabilities of eighty ocean bottom seismometers operated by Scripps Institution of Oceanography as part of the NSF-funded national Ocean Bottom Seismometer Instrument Pool .
The seismometers will be outfitted with rechargeable battery packs , radio beacons for location during recovery , and Ethernet cards with flash memory to improve data downloading , and reduce noise and power consumption .
The award is supported by the Division of Ocean Sciences at NSF .
Scripps Institution will provide cost-share support from non-federal funds for more than 30 % of equipment costs .
This collaborative proposal would use establishment data from EEO reports to investigate changes in occupational segregation across nine broad occupational categories between 1966 and 1999 .
Preliminary analyses have documented the national declines in average within-establishment segregation by gender and racial/ethnic group across the 34 years of data .
Average segregation by county and industry will be made available as a public use data file .
The levels of and changes in establishment-level segregation will be analyzed to estimate the effects of factors at the establishment level ( e.g. , years since founding ) , the firm level ( e.g. , federal reporting requirements ) , the industry level ( e.g. , market competition ) , and the local area ( e.g. , minority concentrations and women 's labor force participation ) .
Scientists are in general agreement with the idea that urbanization and its accompanying habitat loss and fragmentation will result in a reduced communities of organisms-often referred to as opportunistic , generalist or weedy species-that are able to cope with the novel selection pressures and stressors of the urban environment through rapid evolution or plasticity , or both .
Evidence for this point of view comes from the disproportionate persistence of broadly distributed species in urban environments , the rapid evolution of resistance to toxins by fungi , bacteria , plants , insects , and even mammals , and the rapid evolution among some invertebrate groups of preference for introduced plant hosts .
While it is clear that specific selection pressure in the urban environment can result in rapid evolution of specific traits , it remains unclear how and by what mechanisms the overall physiology and life history characteristics of populations will change with urbanization .
Specifically , will populations in urban environments become more opportunistic , and if so what roles will phenotypic plasticity and evolution play ?
To address these questions this project will investigate the response of a common stream fish , blacknose dace , to watershed urbanization .
Past comparative studies have documented increased growth rates , younger age and size at maturity , increased swimming performance , and reduced predator avoidance behavior in populations occupying streams draining heavily urbanized watersheds ( > 90 % urban land use ) .
The general goals of this project are to continue comparative studies in greater detail , including extending them to the cellular level , and to investigate the relative roles of phenotypic plasticity and evolution in producing the differences observed in urban populations .
Field studies will involve comparison of cellular and tissue structure , protein expression , metabolism , lipid storage , diet , and survival across a series of streams draining watersheds with 20 to > 90 % urban land use .
A common garden experiment will be conducted to investigate the potential genetic basis of any of the differences observed in past studies , or discovered during this study .
By conducting programs to enhance undergraduate retention in the project over multiple years the investigators hope to increase undergraduate understanding of , and desire to pursue multidisciplinary studies in graduate school .
The plant cuticle , being the outermost barrier , is the first point of contact in the interaction between plants and fungal pathogens .
The cuticle is composed of an insoluble biopolyester , cutin , and a complex mixture of soluble , non-polar lipids collectively called waxes .
Cutin is the first structural barrier that the fungal infection peg must penetrate in order to infect the plant .
Prior support from NSF was primarily responsible for the basic information obtained about the chemistry and biosynthesis of cutin , as well as the role of the cuticle in plant-fungus interaction .
Cutinase secreted by the invading fungus helps it to attach to the host and penetrate the outer barrier .
According to previously obtained evidence , when fungal conidia contact a plant surface , the small amount of constitutively expressed cutinase present on the conidia releases hydroxy fatty acid monomers and oligomers from cutin , and these soluble products cause induction of high levels of cutinase that helps the infection process .
With cloned cutinase genes and transcription factors , it has been shown that in Nectria haematococca one transcription factor , CTF1b , regulates a constitutively expressed cutinase gene ( cut2 ) , and another transcription factor , CTF1a , is involved in cutin monomer induction of another cutinase gene , cut1 .
The mechanism by which hydroxy fatty acids or their oligomers induce cut1 remains to be elucidated .
Cut1 induction involves a palindromic promoter element that contains 2 overlapping palindromes .
Palindrome 2 is required for cut1 induction by cutin monomers .
Palindrome binding protein ( PBP ) binds palindrome1 of cut1 and acts as a repressor that prevents CTF1a binding to palindrome 2 .
Since palindrome 1 of cut2 has 2 nucleotide substitutions , PBP can not bind to it and suppress cut2 expression , and thus this gene is constitutively expressed .
It is postulated that ctf1a induction by cutin monomers allows CTF1a to outcompete with PBP to bind cut1 promoter and cause cut1 induction .
Cutin monomer or oligomer-stimulated phosphorylation of this cutin response element binding protein ( CREBP ) allows it to bind CRE and transcriptionally activate ctf1a gene .
It is also possible that phosphorylation of PBP might weaken its binding to palindrome1 of cut1 and thus help relieve the suppression .
This project will test this hypothesis and define these regulatory processes at a molecular level .
Disruption of ctf1a gene drastically reduces virulence of N. haematococca , but the drastic decrease in cutinase level resulting from this disruption can not explain the loss of virulence because supplementation of the inoculum with cutinase or mechanical breaching of the cuticle does not recover virulence of the disruptants .
Obviously , this Cys6Zn2 binuclear protein ( CTF1a ) also regulates other gene ( s ) required for virulence .
This project will seek the identity of these virulence genes .
The results expected from this project will elucidate novel molecular mechanisms involved in some of the fundamental processes in plant-fungus interaction , possibly suggesting novel approaches to control fungal diseases .
Fungal infection causes by far the most damage to food and fiber production .
This project could make a significant contributions to an understanding of this interaction that may help manage damaging fungal diseases of plants .
Shifts In Wolf Spider Reproductive Behavior Under Predation RiskMatthew H. Persons , Susquehanna University At every moment , animals must weigh trade-offs and make decisions about how to allocate time and energy into foraging and reproduction while trying to minimize exposure to risks such as predation .
The wolf spider , Pardosa milvina , displays effective anti-predator behavior in the presence of information about one of its major predators the co-occurring wolf spider , Hogna helluo .
The anti-predator behavior is mediated through cues ( putatively silk draglines and feces ) that the predator deposits as it occupies an area .
Using these cues as a surrogate for predation risk , the specific costs ( predation or reduced reproductive success ) can be experimentally decoupled from the benefits ( survival and increased reproductive success ) .
Through manipulation of the presence or absence of H. helluo cues ( perceived predation risk ) with or without a living H. helluo ( actual predation risk ) , the behavioral trade-offs and relative risk of predation can be quantified for every stage in the reproductive process .
In each stage one can quantify ( 1 ) the susceptibility of the animals to predation , ( 2 ) the behavioral changes made in response to a perceived threat of predation , ( 3 ) the degree to which those behavioral changes provide some protection from predation , and ( 4 ) the impact of altering reproductive behaviors in response to predation risk on reproductive success and fitness ( survival , egg production , and phenology ) .
Experiments will be conducted in the laboratory and in the field .
The intellectual merit of this study lies in the fact that it will advance the understanding of predator-prey interactions .
In addition , it will lead to a clearer understanding of how natural selection through predation interacts with sexual selection in shaping mating strategies at each stage of the mating process .
This study will also provide a deeper understanding of the factors that allow the coexistence of two important predatory arthropods inhabiting agroecosystems .
This information will lead to an understanding of the mechanisms that maintain biological diversity and will have important implications for biological control in agricultural systems .
The broader impacts resulting from the proposed research lie in the development of a collaborative research community including PhDs and undergraduates from two very different institutions a two-year , open admission campus of a state-assisted university ( Miami University , Hamilton Campus ) and a private liberal arts college ( Susquehanna University ) .
Recruiting efforts will target non-traditional students , students from local Appalachian populations , as well as traditional minority groups .
This program will unite undergraduate researchers from the two institutions behind a common research goal and , in so doing , expose them both to the culture of a different educational environment .
The research program consists of a number of technically straightforward experiments that can easily be undertaken by individuals or teams of undergraduates as independent projects .
The beauty of such a research program is that undergraduates can take ownership of significant portions of the project and execute them to publication .
When these various projects are considered together , a comprehensive understanding of the reproduction behavior of an economically important predator will be revealed .
This research program will help build the research program of a new Assistant Professor ( Persons ) , rejuvenate the research program of a senior faculty member ( Rypstra ) and help a recent Ph.D. ( Postdoctoral Associate ) learn how to develop a research program at an undergraduate institution .
Undergraduates will explore the literature , write research proposals and papers , and present their findings to their peers and to professionals at regional and national meetings .
Large scale utility electrical power transmission systems such as the power system of the Western United States can and do suffer cascading events leading to widespread blackouts .
These blackouts severely impact the public , commerce , and government and are a vulnerability in the nation 's infrastructure .
Rather than focusing on the detailed causes of individual blackouts , this project addresses the global , complex system dynamics of a long series of blackouts .
New models , simulation and analysis methods will be developed to capture the essentials of criticality , self-organization and cascading failure .
Particular attention will be given to the power tails of probability distributions of blackout sizes that occur in North American blackout data and generally in systems at criticality .
These power tails imply that large , catastrophic blackouts are much more likely than predicted by conventional risk analyses .
The project will develop new risk analysis methods and explore operating techniques to mitigate the risks of major blackouts .
Communication networks such as the Internet also develop major cascading disruptions and work will also be pursued in this application to maintain some focus on universal features of disruptions in large , engineered networks of societal importance .
The expected outcomes are the ability to understand , statistically analyze and to some extent mitigate major cascading disruptions in power transmission and communication networks .
The scientific outcomes are an improved understanding and new application of complex system dynamics to the engineering and analysis of stressed networks .
Educational outcomes include the training of undergraduate and graduate students in a multidisciplinary team .
0216381WeiThe phenomenal growth of wireless systems in thc last 15 years represents a major paradigm change for society .
Today , wireless , personal , and mobile communications are essential for our modern economy and the general well being of the country .
Wireless technologies have not only brought in USA billions of dollars in technology export , but also significantly increased the productivity of the whole nation.The instrumentation the PIs are requesting in this proposal is a wireless communication systems emulator .
In short , it can transmit and receive not only standard wireless signals and display them in detail , but it also allows them to deviate from these standards .
It contains a universal wireless signal generator/transmitter , a universal wireless signal receiver , a high resolution network analyzer and a multi-input network analyzer.Wireless communications has been a major research focus area in the School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science ( SEECS ) , UCF , over the past few years .
A major mission of SEECS is to advance the future of wireless communications through education and research .
The PIs involved in this effort have been conducting research in wireless communications for a number of years now .
Some examples of the state-of-the art that they have been engaged are included below ( a ) Invented new decoding algorithms that are not only best known for block lengths from 100-250 bits , but also specifically geared towards practical implementation and compatibility with existing wireless systems .
With the proposed emulator , they will be able to test these algorithms for applications in the real world .
( b ) Introduced a new intelligent packet network architecture , called a cognitive packet network ( CPN ) , in which the packets have intelligent capabilities for routing and flow control themselves .
The PIs currently have a network test-bed , with fixed wire-line linkage , and their plan , with the help of the emulator , is to extend it to incorporate wireless linkages .
With the proposed instrument , they can also increase the intelligence of the packets using the information gained from link-quality , channel state information , power levels .
etc .
( c ) Teleoperated robots have wide application from search-rescue operation to factory operation .
The robotics and controls lab has several robots , real-time control systems , and other equipments .
The proposed instrument will enable the PIs to extend their capability to mobile robots with advanced wireless communication capabilities.The faculty members on this team have published several hundreds of papers in leading technical journals and conferences .
In fact , all PIs and senior personnel have served or are serving as Editors / Associate Editors for prestigious international journals in the areas of their expertise .
This state-of-the-art instrumentation will help them verify their research results , extend their capabilities , and justify their future research directions.This equipment will also enhance their educational capabilities .
The PIs currently offer a Wireless Communications option for their electrical engineering undergraduate students and have several graduate students working on projects in the field of wireless communications .
This emulator will not only help demonstrate to the students the theory presented in the classroom , but also provide a hands-on platform for thesis and dissertation works .
0216305 Paul The objective of this research is to develop a sensor to detect enteric viruses that will have application to provide real-time monitoring of problem microorganisms in coastal waters .
Solid phase immobilization of target mRNA , amplification and detection by means of microbial beacons is the plan that these investigators have .
Each of these steps is available technology .
Putting them together to provide real time monitoring of enteric viruses , and modeling the data to determine predictive patterns of enteroviral release to the environment as a function of environmental perturbation and climate variability is to be done with this grant .
0216164DuennebierThis Major Research Instrumentation award to University of Hawaii at Manoa provides funds for development of a cabled oceanographic observatory , at the location of the existing Hawaii Ocean Timeseries ( HOT ) Station ALOHA , to be known as the ANZCAN-ALOHA Ocean Observatory .
The goal of the project is to provide power and data communication capability over the abandoned ANZCAN telecommunications cable , which will be moved 26 kilometers to the existing site of the 13-year ALOHA time series .
The cable comes ashore on Oahu , and it will be managed from University of Hawaii 's Manoa campus .
It will enable a major increase in experimental capability at and near the site , with a kilowatt of power and 2 mbaud data rate available to support instruments and ocean experiments in physical , chemical , biological and geological oceanography as well as meteorology , ocean optics , biogeochemistry and other fields .
A moored profiler will provide continuous monitoring of the physical properties of the full water column , with operator control to respond to ocean events .
An acoustic modem capability will be included to allow deployment and communication with experiments that are not physically attached to the cabled junction box .
The cabled observatory will have Internet connectivity , allowing researchers to observe and control their experiments , and providing links to the observatory and to related educational sites for students at levels from grade school to graduate school .
University of Hawaii will provide cost-share support equal to more than 30 % of equipment costs , per MRI Program guidelines for development proposals undertaken at Ph.D.-granting institutions .
*** With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation program , SUNY Buffalo will acquire a high-resolution ( 1.5 nm ) scanning electron microscope equipped to function as an electron beam lithography system and a wafer probe station for nanostructure device characterization , both for research and education purposes .
This system will permit fabrication and test of metal , semiconductor , and polymer nanostructures for nanoelectronic , nanophotonic , and spintronic and molectronic applications , as well as for basic physics and chemistry studies .
This acquisition will enhance existing and planned research programs in the Institute for Lasers , Photonics and Biophotonics and its affiliated materials activity , the Center for Advanced Photonic and Electronic Materials ( CAPEM ) , as well as other research programs in the Departments of Chemistry , Physics and Electrical Engineering .
Research efforts in these areas are presently supported by NSF , DARPA , ONR , AFOSR and New York State .
The system will be maintained and operated as a research facility through the Institute of Lasers , Photonics and Biophotonics ( ILPB ) .
This is a University-supported institute that brings together faculty from science and engineering departments , and from departments in the School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences at the University at Buffalo , as well as from other universities .
A half-time Ph.D.-level technical support person will be responsible for Daily operation and training of students , who will be supervised by faculty members .
A wide range of research projects will make use of this facility basic physics of low dimensional ( nanoscale ) quantum fluids and magnets , studies ( through nano-apertures ) of internal transitions of excitons in lateral fluctuation single quantum dots , fabrication and evaluation of nanoscale thin-film transistors and nanowires , fabrication and evaluation of molectronic device structures , and fabrication and basic studies of nanospintronic structures .
In addition , this system will also be used to educate and train a generation of students in Electrical Engineering , Physics and Chemistry in nanoscale lithography and device/structure fabrication and characterization ; it will also enhance in an important way a recently funded NSF IGERT program. % % % With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation program , SUNY Buffalo will acquire a high-resolution ( 1.5 nm ) scanning electron microscope equipped to function as an electron beam lithography system and a wafer probe station for nanostructure device characterization , both for research and education purposes .
This system will permit fabrication and test of metal , semiconductor , and polymer nanostructures for nanoelectronic , nanophotonic , and spintronic and molectronic applications , as well as for basic physics and chemistry studies .
The system will be maintained and operated as a research facility through the Institute of Lasers , Photonics and Biophotonics ( ILPB ) .
This is a University-supported institute that brings together faculty from science and engineering departments , and from departments in the School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences at the University at Buffalo , as well as from other universities .
A half-time Ph.D.-level technical support person will be responsible for Daily operation and training of students , who will be supervised by faculty members .
A wide range of research projects will make use of this facility .
In addition , this system will also be used to educate and train a generation of students in Electrical Engineering , Physics and Chemistry in nanoscale lithography and device/structure fabrication and characterization ; it will also enhance in an important way a recently funded NSF IGERT program .
With support from the Major Research Instrumentation ( MRI ) Program , the Department of Chemistry at St .
Cloud State University will acquire a Matrix-assisted Laser Desorption Ionization - Time of Flight ( MALDI-TOF ) Mass Spectrometer .
This instrument will be used in a wide variety of studies , including a ) the identification of molecular determinants of cellular sensitivity to cytostatic/cytotoxic agents that may be unique to tumor cells ; b ) the identification of genetic polymorphisms in human aldehyde dehydrogenases that will render differential cellular sensititivy to cytotoxic agents ; c ) characterization of electroactive polymers ; and d ) the study of precursor molecules used as dopant sources for fluorescent sol-gel glasses .
In addition , MALDI MS will be a major component in a new laboratory curriculum for biophysical chemistry.Matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization ( MALDI ) time-of-flight ( TOF ) mass spectrometry is the technique of choice for obtaining accurate molecular weights on molecules up to and over 300,000 daltons , with extremely high sensitivity .
Use of a MALDI-TOF mass spectrometer has therefore become a standard technique in most DNA/protein core facilities .
The ability to obtain very accurate molecular weights of biological molecules is fundamental to all biological and biomedical research and essential in a modern research and training environment .
These studies will have an impact in the areas of biophysical and materials chemistry .
EIA 02-16165Skormin , Victor A.SUNY - Binghamton MRI Development of an Advanced Laser Communications Research Facility with Internet Accessible Instrumentation This proposal , developing an experimental research laboratory , expands a concept of sharing advanced scientific equipment in cyberspace .
This technology facilitates the access to equipment via the Internet offering the most advanced instrumentation and relevant interactive instruction to diverse groups of population ; thus enhancing engineering education and training .
This development will set unique space-qualified laser equipment intended for space communication and offer carefully designed fixed and open-ended experiments nation- and world-wide .
The proposed project is not a virtual lab , offering instead enhanced real infrastructure of the laser communications research lab .
The new development involves upgrading the equipment and auxiliary systems and enhancing its reliability , accuracy and rate of operation .
Hence the facility developed will be suitable for unlimited global access via the Internet , enabling universities , industries , high schools , and individual users worldwide to perform advanced experiments in real-time and to collect data for analysis and interpretation .
This project specifically enables and services an often forgotten population , the disabled .
The Laser Communication Research Laboratory ( LCRL ) , where the development will take place , contributes to satellite communication technology by addressing , among others , the following technical research problems1 .
Modeling , Characterization , and Control of Electromechanical Beam Steering Systems,2 .
Free Space Propagation , Diffraction and Alignment of Laser Beams,3 .
Optical Beam Modulation and Steering,4 .
Rejection of Atmospheric Effects in Communication Systems,5 .
Experimental Analysis , Modeling and Control of Acousto-Optic Laser Beam Steering Systems with Bragg Cells,6 .
Gimbals Systems , and7 .
Liquid Crystal Technology .
This grant is for the acquisition of a multilayer monochromator for the synchrotron microtomography station at the Louisiana State University Center for Advance Microstructures and Devices ( CAMD ) .
A SXM station has recently been assembled at the synchrotron facility by a multidisciplinary group of physicists , chemists , and engineers .
The SXM station has been installed on a CAMD bending magnet with a maximum energy of about 15 keV .
It is anticipated that in 2002 , the station will be placed on a 7.3T wiggler beamline , which will provide usable photons to > 50 keV .
While the early results have been highly successful , analysis of the data has highlighted the need for the monochromatic beam .
As a polychromatic x-ray beam traverses a sample , the shape of the energy spectrum changes with the lower end of the incident energy spectrum absorbed more than the higher end .
This property is known as beam hardening .
For the lower Z elements found in environmental and biological samples , a monochromatic beam will aid in optimizing the contrast and thus minimizing the image artifacts from beam hardening effects .
In addition , a monochromatic beam will also aid in chemical identification through contrast arising from a judicious choice of energies above and below core-excitation thresholds .
The CAMD SXM beamline appears to be the only SXM beamline in the world currently without a monochromator .
Synchrotron x-ray microtomography ( SXM ) is playing an increasingly important role in research in materials , biology , physics , geology , and environmental sciences .
Many applications use tomographic imaging techniques to produce a three-dimensional representation of a sample .
Since October 2000 , the SXM station at LSU has been used to acquire images from such disciplines as chemistry , physics , biology , oceanography , material science , and engineering .
Because of CAMD 's close association with the state of Louisiana and LSU , education and outreach are strongly emphasized .
Participants in the SXM research program include local high school students , undergraduate research assistants ( through several NSF-sponsored REU programs ) , graduate students , post-doctoral associates , and both LSU and Southern University faculty and staff .
A state-of-the art ( scanning ) transmission electron microscope ( TEM ) will be upgraded to an environmental TEM allowing near-atomic resolution imaging at pressures up to 8 Torr and temperatures up to 900 degree C. These capabilities are vital for proposed nanoscience , biotechnology and environmental science research .
Near-atom-scale patterns will be defined by electron-beam decomposition of molecules adsorbed on surfaces .
In situ investigation of vapor-liquid-solid grown Si nanopillars will facilitate rapid process optimization allowing growth on technologically relevant Si ( 100 ) surfaces .
Characterization of artificial bone synthesized using genetically engineered osteoblasts will be facilitated by the capability for imaging hydrated specimens .
Imaging at elevated pressure and temperature will be employed to discover novel materials useful for mineral sequestration of greenhouse gases .
These advanced characterization capabilities will be fully integrated into the classroom learning experience and will significantly enhance industrial outreach facilitating academic/industrial knowledge transfer. % % % A state-of-the art ( scanning ) transmission electron microscope ( TEM ) will be upgraded to an environmental TEM allowing near-atomic resolution imaging of diverse samples at pressures of up to 8 Torr and temperatures of up to 900 degree C. These capabilities are vital for cutting edge research proposed in strategic thrust areas at ASU including nanoscience and technology , biotechnology and environmental science .
Specifically , electron beam stimulated surface chemistry will be employed for writing near atomic scale patterns , real-time imaging will be used to optimize process conditions for Si nanopillar formation , characterization of tissue engineered artificial bone and in situ investigation of mineral sequestration of greenhouse gases .
The advanced characterization capabilities of this instrument will be fully integrated into classroom learning at ASU through its internet connection to the Goldwater Materials Visualization Facility .
Further , these capabilities will enhance academic/industrial knowledge transfer facilitated by our highly successful Industrial Associates program .
This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program supports the acquisition of a field emission gun for a scanning Auger Microscope at PA St U University Park .
Scanning Auger Microscope is an important tool for the study of surfaces , interfaces and thin films .
The purchase of an electron gun will allow this technique to be performed in existing equipment at Penn State .
Materials researchers will use scanning Auger microscopy to address important questions in the development of both conventional and nanoscale semiconductor devices , superconductors , and carbon nanostructures .
Users in the Center for Innovative Sintered Products , Center for Thin Film Devices , and National Nanofabrication Users Network at Penn State will also benefit from availability of the technique .
The equipment will be integrated into an existing undergraduate laboratory course in materials science and engineering , and a new one credit graduate course will be offered to teach students about the principles and operation of the scanning Auger microscope .
Both graduate and undergraduate students will use the equipment for research.This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program supports the acquisition of a field emission gun for a scanning Auger Microscope at PA St U University Park .
Scanning Auger Microscope is an important tool for the study of surfaces , interfaces and thin films .
The purchase of an electron gun will allow this technique to be performed in existing equipment at Penn State .
Materials researchers will use scanning Auger microscopy to address important questions in the development of both conventional and nanoscale semiconductor devices , superconductors , and carbon nanostructures .
Users in the Center for Innovative Sintered Products , Center for Thin Film Devices , and National Nanofabrication Users Network at Penn State will also benefit from availability of the technique .
The equipment will be integrated into an existing undergraduate laboratory course in materials science and engineering , and a new one credit graduate course will be offered to teach students about the principles and operation of the scanning Auger microscope .
Both graduate and undergraduate students will use the equipment for research .
This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports the University of California at Santa Barbara with the acquisition of a state-of-the-art field emission transmission electron microscope ( FE-TEM ) with capabilities for atomic resolution Z-contrast imaging and spectroscopy .
The instrument is crucial to meet needs in ongoing and future research projects in electronic , inorganic , and structural materials , UCSB proposes the acquisition .
The needs of the research can be fulfilled with a 200 kV TEM/STEM equipped with a field emission source , high angle annular dark field detector , a 2Kx2K CCD detector , and state-of-the-art electron spectrometer/energy filter .
Z-contrast imaging and atomic resolution spectroscopy have been routinely demonstrated on the instrument with a 1.4 Angstrom probe size , 20 picoAmpere beam current , and energy resolution of ~0.7 electron Volts .
The acquisition of the proposed FE-TEM will free an existing conventional 200 kV TEM for studies of soft materials .
The acquisition of the new FE-TEM will strengthen the education of students in advanced TEM .
Graduate students and post-doctoral researchers are the primary 'hands-on ' users of TEM at UCSB .
Formal training in TEM is provided in a series of courses is offered in the Materials Department .
A new course in advanced TEM that reflects the unique capabilities of a FE-TEM will be offered .
The advanced TEM course will include a lab module to provide hands-on training in high-resolution imaging in CTEM and in STEM and in advanced analytical techniques , such as electron energy-loss spectroscopy .
Through the Outreach program of the MRSEC , the scientists will work with high school teachers on TEM sample preparation and imaging and thus teach and connect to a broad community of students and teachers.To meet needs in ongoing and future research projects in advanced electronic , inorganic , and structural materials , UCSB will acquire a state-of-the-art field emission transmission electron microscope ( FE-TEM ) .
Such an instrument produces an atomic scale electron probe .
This sub-nanometer probe ( ~2 x 10-10 meters ) can be used to image individual atoms and atomic columns with direct information on structure , composition , and bonding .
An advanced FE-TEM provides a unique combination of atomic-scale information that is essential for the advancement of nanoscience and nanotechnology.Graduate students and post-doctoral researchers are the primary 'hands-on ' users of TEM at UCSB .
Formal training in TEM is provided in a series of courses offered in the Materials Dept .
The new FE-TEM will strengthen the education of students in advanced TEM .
A new course in advanced TEM that reflects the unique capabilities of a FE-TEM will be offered .
The advanced TEM course will include hands-on training in high-resolution imaging in CTEM and in STEM and in advanced analytical techniques , such as electron energy-loss spectroscopy .
Through the Outreach program of the MRSEC , UCSB scientists will work with high school teachers on TEM sample preparation and imaging and thus teach and connect to a broad community of students and teachers .
Project AbstractSES # 0216982 Workshop on the History of Algebra in the Nineteenth and Twentieth CenturiesMichael Singer , Mathematical Sciences Research Institute , Cal -BerkeleyKaren Parshall , University of Virginia This proposal is for a workshop at the Mathematical Sciences Research Institute at the University of California at Berkeley in spring 2003 .
The conference , which culminates a semester-long focus at the Institute on commutative algebra , brings together leading historians of mathematics and mathematicians for a five-day discussion of relevant topics .
This workshop represents an important departure for the institute , which normally focuses on purely mathematical enterprises .
The organizers are Jeremy J .
Gray ( Centre for the History of the Mathematical Sciences , The Open University ) and co-PI , Karen Hunger Parshall ( Departments of History and Mathematics , University of Virginia ) .
The workshop should have two components lectures and moderated discussions .
Some twenty , hour-long lectures are to be delivered over a five-day period by established researchers , more junior scholars , and advanced graduate students .
Ample time for questions and discussion follows each lecture .
Each day closes with a moderated discussion period for a dialogue between the historians and the mathematicians visiting MSRI about critical issues in the history of modern algebra .
Among the topics to be analyzed areo the contribution of David Hilbert to modern algebra , his re-working of the ideas ofDedekind and Kronecker , and the role of his new formulation of the subject in guidingsubsequent research ; o the origins of Emmy Noether 's work and its later developments ; o the spread and development of algebraic thought from Germany to Britain , France , and the United States ; o the importance and the nature of the connections between commutative algebra , algebraic geometry , and algebraic number theory ; o the philosophy and the teaching of modern algebra ; ando the institutionalization of modern algebra in the nineteenth and early twentiethcenturies.This workshop provides a unique forum for the interaction of historians of mathematics and mathematicians , who represent one of the primary audiences for research in the history of mathematics .
Moreover , the workshop will allow us to take a major step forward not only in understanding the evolution of modern algebra in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries but also in defining a common agenda for on-going research in the history of modern mathematics .
Both of these objectives will be accomplished in the short term through interactions at the workshop and in the long term through a published , book-length volume with an explicitly historiographical component .
EIA-0216178David R. AlexanderWichita State UniversityMRI Acquisition of High Performance Computer For Wichita State UniversityThis proposal from an institution in an EPSCoR state , expanding the high performance computer in their High Performance Computing Center , enables the faculty in physics , chemistry , mechanical and aeronautical engineering , and their students to solve large-scale computational problems .
Over 120 faculty , staff , and students will use this centralized facility .
The National Institute would also use the machine cycles for Aviation Research ( NIAR ) .
The current facilities have been outgrown .
Below follows some examples of the projects underway1 .
Integrated Computational Tool for Hypersonic Flow Simulations2 .
Evaluation and Retro-fit of Fail-Safety in KC-135 Fuselage Structure3 .
Design of Plasma Sprayed Coatings through Computer Simulation4 .
Computational Analysis in Adhesive-Bonded Composite Joints5 .
Quantum Neural Networks6 .
Model Atmospheres for Cool Stars7 .
Mixed-Metal Complexes Multielectron Transfer Agents8 .
Molecular Modeling of Dimeric and Polymeric Ionic Liquids A grant has been awarded to Iowa State University to acquire instrumentation for the analysis of DNA oligonucleotide microarrays that allow the parallel evaluation of up to 22,500 genes in a single experiment .
This system will enable researchers at ISU to employ state-of-the-art genomics technology to a variety of plant , animal , and human research topics including ; the molecular characterization of genes coincident with disease , response to biotic or abiotic stresses , or cellular development.Oligonucleotide-based microarrays can already be purchased which have been designed for genome analysis of a number of different species .
Research programs at Iowa State University that will be most advantaged by this system are those investigating questions in development , metabolic networking , biotic and abiotic stresses , and that involve Arabidopsis , Triticeae ( barley/wheat ) , yeast , Drosophila , C. elegans , mouse , rat , cattle , or human microarrays .
A typical experiment could involve an organism infected with a pathogen compared to a control sample that was not infected .
Messenger RNA would be extracted from both samples and then used to probe the oligonucleotide microarrays .
This RNA contains the genetic code for the specific genes that are active during pathogen infection .
The new instrumentation facilitates highly quantitative assessment of the expression levels of each of the 22,500 genes in the two samples , thus , comparison of the two sets of data would point out genes that are correlated with disease responses.The use of this technology will make it possible to systematically study how genes contribute to complex phenotypes ranging from disease , response to external stimuli , and normal growth and development .
The rapid discovery of new genes associated with such complex traits is expected to lead to novel discoveries in medicine and agriculture .
Another mission of ISU is to train graduate students and undergraduate students in contemporary biology , and it is essential that they become proficient in the theory and use of modern genomics tools .
This instrument will be made available to graduate students conducting research in the departments of Agronomy , Animal Science , Biochemistry , Botany , Plant Pathology , and Zoology & Genetics as well as in the interdepartmental graduate programs in Genetics , Plant Physiology , Ecology & Evolutionary Biology , and Molecular , Cellular , & Developmental Biology .
In addition , several students from a NSF-funded REU ( Research Experience for Undergraduates , Undergraduate Research Experience in Molecular Biotechnology and Genomics ) program will have access to this advanced technology each summer .
The REU program focuses on students from traditional minority universities and students from small Midwestern liberal arts colleges .
Half of the students are members of under-represented groups and half are women .
Thus , the instrumentation system will be integrated into both the graduate and undergraduate education programs at ISU .
This collaborative proposal would use establishment data from EEO reports to investigate changes in occupational segregation across nine broad occupational categories between 1966 and 1999 .
Preliminary analyses have documented the national declines in average within-establishment segregation by gender and racial/ethnic group across the 34 years of data .
Average segregation by county and industry will be made available as a public use data file .
The levels of and changes in establishment-level segregation will be analyzed to estimate the effects of factors at the establishment level ( e.g. , years since founding ) , the firm level ( e.g. , federal reporting requirements ) , the industry level ( e.g. , market competition ) , and the local area ( e.g. , minority concentrations and women 's labor force participation ) .
0216784KaratoThis award will permit the purchase of a scanning electron microscope ( SEM ) with a range of capabilities for high-resolution analyses of structures and compositions of Earth materials , including biological samples .
The SEM we will purchase is a Philips XL30 ESEM-FEG , which operates with both low- and high-vacuum modes with a field emission gun ( FEG ) and a software/hardware package for an electron backscattered diffraction ( EBSD ) pattern analysis .
This new facility is critical to the diverse research activities at Yale Geology and Geophysics including studies of ( 1 ) deformation microstructures of experimentally and naturally deformed samples ( Karato , Brandon ) , ( 2 ) fluid-rock interaction ( Ague , Rye ) , ( 3 ) microbial geochemistry and geomicrobiology ( Blake ) .
Complete orientation measurements with high-spatial resolution , as provided by the EBSD package attached to this type of state-of-the-art SEM , are critical to microstructural studies on deformed rocks by Karato and Brandon .
Geologic application of this technique is widespread in Europe , but has been limited to only a handful of labs in the United States .
The spatial resolution of orientation measurements is close to 0.25 mm when the FEG electron source is used with an EBSD package .
Such a high spatial resolution is critical , particularly for the experimental studies in Karato 's group where microstructural developments under high-pressure conditions are studied using specimens with very fine grain size .
Similarly , the ESEM mode of operation of this SEM has major advantages in several research areas at Yale Geology and Geophysics .
This includes the study of fluid-rock interaction through the charge-contrast imaging technique ( which works selectively at ESEM mode ) , and the study of microbial geochemistry and geomicrobiology , which requires high-resolution images of the morphology of mineral surfaces and associated microorganisms .
Addition of this facility to the existing analytical and other experimental facilities will significantly enhance the research programs of experimental Earth science at the department of Geology and Geophysics at Yale University .
*** Synchrotron based high resolution x-ray emission spectroscopy has developed into a powerful approach to probe the metal site valence and spin polarized charge density in transition metal oxide systems .
In addition , it can be used to obtain light-element x-ray absorption spectra ( such as carbon ) with bulk sensitivity .
However , this approach has been limited to specialists because of the lack of dedicated systems .
With this award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program and the Major Research Instrumentation program scientists at New Jersey Institute of Technology ( NJIT ) will develop a high resolution x-ray analyzer which will be stationed at the National Synchrotron Light Source in Brookhaven National Laboratory .
Optimizing the instrument for thin films will makes it , in general , useful for chemical characterization of dilute systems .
The instrument will be stationed the at the National Synchrotron Light Source and will be available to a broad range of users in fields as diverse of chemistry , biology , geology and physics .
At all levels of the construction and research conducted with this analyzer graduate students will be involved .
The instrument will be incorporated in graduate and undergraduate laboratory courses .
In addition , the instrument will be utilized as a chemical analysis tool in a transition metal oxide preparation and characterization workshop for Newark area high school students conducted at the NJIT .
This will serve to develop scientific literacy and to directly influence students from underrepresented groups to pursue careers in science.High-resolution x-ray emission spectroscopy based at electron storage rings at national laboratories has developed into a powerful tool to examine the chemistry of metal atoms .
This tool can be applied to study the valence of metal sites in protein molecules in order to understand their function .
In addition , this approach can be used to study light atom such as carbon without the need for a high vacuum system .
However , its use has been limited to specialists because of the lack of dedicated systems .
With this award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program and the Major Research Instrumentation program scientists at the New Jersey Institute of Technology ( NJIT ) will develop a high resolution x-ray analyzer which will be stationed at the National Synchrotron Light Source ( NSLS ) in Brookhaven National Laboratory .
Stationing the system at the NSLS will make the system available to a broad range of users in fields as diverse of chemistry , biology , geology and physics .
At all levels of the construction and research conducted with this analyzer graduate students will be involved .
The proposed instrument will have a broad impact through the education of graduate and undergraduate students based on its use in laboratory courses .
In addition , the instrument will be utilized as a chemical analysis tool in a transition metal oxide preparation and characterization workshop for Newark area high school students conducted at the NJIT .
This will serve to develop scientific literacy and to directly influence students from underrepresented groups to pursue careers in science .
This project solicits support to acquire a state-of-the-art fluorine laser to be used in laboratory studies of atmospheric processes .
SRI International will host this laser system in a modern laser laboratory that will be made available to the atmospheric research community as a shared facility .
With this system , large quantities of oxygen atoms can be generated under conditions with a low concentration of residual oxygen molecules .
These conditions mimic those in the upper atmosphere of the Earth and will permit the study of collisional processes that would be difficult or impossible to study with other methods .
This laser will make possible a series of laboratory studies addressing important unresolved problems in the fields of aeronomy and atmospheric science .
This MRI proposal provides funding for the purchase of a three-dimensial particle imaging velocimetry ( PIV ) device to augment the existing equipment at the Auburn University Plasma Science Laboratory ( PSL ) .
The PSL has a unique niche in the dusty plasma community - the ability to perform real-time , two-dimensional particle transport investigations .
This new device makes it possible to overcome the key limitation of the present PIV device , that it is only able to measure two of the three velocity components of the particles .
Because dusty plasmas , plasmas containing charged microparticles , are present in many different environments , from astrophysical systems such as nebula and planetary rings to industrial processing tools , understanding the behavior of dusty plasmas in detail will have broad impact in a number of fields .
Members of the myosin family of actin-based molecular motors use the chemical energy from ATP hydrolysis to perform mechanical work such as vesicle , membrane and mRNA transport in cells .
One member of the family , myosin VI , is unique in that it travels towards the pointed ends of actin filaments , as opposed to the barbed ends .
Pointed-end directionality enables myosin VI to transport endocytic vesicles from the cell surface to the cell interior .
Myosin VI is processive ; for each diffusional encounter with an actin filament , a single myosin VI molecule possessing two catalytic subunits takes multiple steps , each coupled to an individual ATPase cycle , before dissociating .
The two subunits alternate between leading and trailing positions on the actin filament track .
Slow , rate-limiting ADP release enables myosin VI to remain attached to actin for a large fraction of its ATPase cycle time and is believed to coordinate the catalytic cycles of the two heads so that at least one is bound to actin and ADP at all times.In this project , biochemical and biophysical experiments will be employed to provide a complete and detailed characterization of kinetic and thermodynamic parameters of ADP and actin binding to myosin VI , and to identify the mechanism of communication between the catalytic subunits during processive stepping .
The detailed analysis of reaction mechanisms will provide quantitative models for the molecular mechanisms of energy transduction , processivity and regulation in myosin VI .
General principles about free-energy coupling and cooperativity in molecular motors will emerge from this work .
Particle tracking in turbulent flows requires very high temporal ( approx .
100,000Hz ) and spatial resolution imaging detection systems ( 512 x 512 pixels ) .
Such a system generates data at very high rates , which need to be transferred , stored , and analyzed .
In addition three-dimensional tracking of many particles requires the simultaneous stereoscopic imaging by four cameras .
Traditional detector technology can not handle the resulting onslaught of data ( > 26 gigabytes of data per second per camera ) that would need to be streamed into memory and stored for further processing .
Here , we will develop the next generation , ultra-high speed , high-resolution particle tracking instrumentation for following the motion of approximately 300 minute tracer particles in three dimensions with a temporal resolution of 100,000Hz .
This new system will be two orders of magnitude faster than any existing conventional imaging system of comparable spatial resolution .
The instrument will be based on stereoscopic imaging with four ultra-high-speed , high-resolution pixel array detectors ( PAD ) that will be developed at Cornell .
Each PAD has 1024x512 intelligent pixels .
The development of the uniquely designed PAD detectors , the data acquisition system , and the data analysis software will result in a technological breakthrough for the Lagrangian analysis of high Reynolds number turbulent flows .
Fully developed turbulence is ubiquitous .
Virtually all engineering and naturally occurring flows ( e.g. , atmospheric , oceanographic , and astrophysical flows ) involve high Reynolds number turbulence .
The transport and mixing properties of turbulence ultimately impact our daily lives .
In systems from the mixing and chemical reactions in a turbulent burner or internal combustion engine to the transport of pollutants ( or bioagents ) in the atmosphere , or even the simple mixing of milk into a coffee cup , the understanding of turbulence is essential .
It is clear that many aspects of turbulence are best studied by following the motion of fluid particles .
The difficulty of tracking particles in high Reynolds number turbulence has thus far made it impossible to test many long-standing predictions .
This project represents a major step to confront this issue .
The detection and analysis system to be developed will simultaneously follow 300 particles at a rate of 100,000 pictures per second .
( A standard TV camera takes 30 pictures per second .
) This high speed will be achieved by using pixel array technology in which each pixel has local intelligence .
Data of this kind will enable theoretical advances in a number of important applications such as scalar mixing and cloud formation .
Moreover , the technology , once developed , is likely to impact broader fields than can not be envisioned at this time .
For example , tracking of particles is at the heart of a number of environmental problems ( e.g. , contaminant or bioagent dispersion ) .
A successful PAD fabrication will likely result in more sensor chips than needed for this study .
Many of these chips would be made available to the larger community .
A grant has been awarded to Dr. Nancy E. Rawson at the Monell Chemical Senses Center to purchase a confocal microscope with associated hardware and software .
The Monell Center is a nonprofit research institute focused on acquiring a fuller understanding of the chemical senses .
Recent studies have revealed that cell-cell interactions play an important role in modulating the output of a variety of sensory receptor cells .
The confocal microscope permits us to directly observe intracellular processes and interactions between different cell types in preparations that more closely reflect those of the intact organism .
In addition , chemosensory cells undergo regeneration throughout the life of the animal .
In order to better understand this capability , studies of growing cells are carried out using methods to identify the different stages in the cells ' lifespan and evaluate the effect of drugs or other treatments on the growth process .
The confocal microscope will be used in projects aimed at addressing a variety of questions ranging from understanding how individual receptor cells detect and respond to chemical stimuli ; how experience influences the ways that organisms respond to chemosensory stimuli ; how odor qualities are encoded in neural activity patterns in the brain ; how stem cells divide and differentiate into mature sensory receptor cells ; and how these sensory systems recover from damage .
These projects utilize standard histology , lectin and immuno-histochemistry , in situ hybridization of fixed tissue specimens , and biophysical methods to study live tissue .
These techniques provide a variety of kinds of data , ranging from protein and mRNA localization in peripheral and central components of the taste , olfactory and trigeminal systems to dynamic extra- and intracellular signalling in tissue slices , cultures and cell ensembles .
The system will also be included as one educational component in our Minority Student Research Apprenticeship Training Program , which has provided summer research experiences for over 300 high school and college undergraduates since its inception.The ability to examine cells in ensembles , such as whole taste buds , or thick tissue sections will dramatically improve our ability to understand how the sensory systems of taste , smell and chemical irritation function in the intact organism .
The confocal microscope will also enhance our ability to provide state-of-the-art training experiences for students participating in our high school , college , graduate and post-doctoral training programs .
This Major Research Instrumentation ( MRI ) award provides funds for the purchase of a scanning electron microscope and a Fourier transformation infrared spectrometer .
This equipment will be used to support research on development of three-dimensional nanomanufacturing technologies and on those technologies ' applications in nanophotonic structures and devices .
Most nanophotonic structures with designed functionalities are complicated and three-dimensional , therefore three-dimensional nanomanufacturing technologies are essential .
The scanning electron microscope can provide images with high resolution , and the Fourier transformation infrared spectrometer can measure the essential optical properties of photonic structures and devices .
These structural and optical properties will provide important information and guidance for the development and optimization of nanomanufacturing processes .
The research conducted using this equipment is interdisciplinary and involves the collaborative efforts of researchers from various departments .
This will likely lead to advances in the sciences and technologies of nanomanufacturing , photonic material , and devices .
By creating a tight-nit environment of mechanical engineers , electrical engineers , and chemists , a new generation of engineers with interdisciplinary knowledge and research experience will be trained through participating in these research activities .
The advances in nanomanufacturing and education will benefit society by helping the United States maintain a competitive edge in this high technology industry and prepare a high quality workforce for the nation 's economy and security .
Project SummaryA grant has been awarded to Western Washington University under the supervision of Drs .
Peterson , Moyer and Young of the Biology Department to support the acquisition ofcore instrumentation and software required for DNA sequencing , genotyping , and analysis .
The ease with which DNA can now be sequenced , coupled withadvances in molecular biology and computer science has revolutionized thebiological sciences .
This technology is now central to basic research inmany disciplines , as well as integral to the training of future researchersand science educators.Funding from this proposal will facilitate primary research in elevendifferent labs with current and pending funding .
A broad array of fieldswill be supported by this instrumentation , including Conservation Biology , Microbial Diversity , Evolutionary Biology , Plant Functional Genomics , Developmental Genetics , and Protein Biochemistry .
State of the artinstrumentation will further enable grant procurement and renewal byallowing us to perform rigorous research using modern techniques .
This coreinstrumentation will also enhance our ability to attract and retain capableprofessors/researchers.In addition to establishing and maintaining externally-funded researchprograms , we are dedicated to the integration of research and trainingthrough the mentoring of undergraduates in faculty research labs .
Thistraining will allow our students to continue to be recognized regionallyand nationally with jobs in the biotechnology industry , admission tograduate and professional schools , and pre-doctoral awards .
Furthermore , we are revising our core biology curriculum with a primary focus on theintegration of molecular biology approaches at all class levels .
In all , over 500 undergraduate students per year will directly benefit from thisinstrumentation through instruction in the Biology Department .
ThroughWWU 's Integrated Laboratory Network the equipment supported by this grantwill be accessible to affiliated programs in the College of Arts andSciences and the Huxley College of Environmental Studies , as well as tofuture K-12 science educators enrolled in the Woodring College ofEducation .
In all , a broad spectrum of people , ranging from faculty andundergraduates to K-12 science students will benefit .
Access to automatedDNA sequencing and genotyping technologies will enhance student educationand professional opportunities while furthering fundamental scienceresearch .
Nuclear Astrophysics has developed a very successful model of stellar nova explosions based on a series of reactions in which protons are captured by atomic nuclei and high-energy electromagnetic radiation is released in the form of gamma rays .
The probabilities of these reactions determine the time scale for the stellar explosion events and are unknown in many cases .
The measurement of these probabilities is a prominent research subject at a number of research facilities around the world .
In many of these studies , a high-efficiency gamma-ray detection system would provide a great increase in sensitivity for these measurements .
The aim of this project is to establish an efficient and versatile gamma-detector system which will be used for experimental research in nuclear physics and nuclear astrophysics .
The system will be used at several laboratories ( most of which are capable of producing exotic ion beams ) in the United States in conjunction with charged-particle detector systems and spectrometers .
Thecomponents of the detector system will be maintained and calibrated with the help of Undergraduate students at Purdue University Calumet.The students will learn essential skills and techniques of modern Nuclear Physics experiments , and will assist in the setup of the detector array in collaboration with researchers at Florida State University , Oak Ridge National Laboratory , Michigan State University , and Argonne National Laboratory .
EIA 02-16661 Rafkin , Scot Chun , Robert San Jose State University Title MRI/RUI/MII Acquisition of a Linux Cluster Super Computer for Meteorological Modeling and Computer Science Research and Education Project ProposedThis proposal from an RUI/MII institution , establishing a Linux-based parallel computing cluster , aims to simulate meteorological phenomena and study and teach the use of parallel processors .
The infrastructure will be used in support of ongoingNumerical modeling of the atmosphere of Mars using the Mars Regional Atmospheric Modeling System ( MRAMS ) andComputer Science Research in the parallel and distributed hardware and software.The first component will benefit the following current research underwayLarge eddy simulations ( LESs ) of the Martian atmosphere to provide insight into the structure and dynamics of the highly unstable convective boundary layer ( including the dynamics of dusts devils ) Mesoscale simulations of past and proposed Mars landing sitesSimulation of local and regional dust storms , and wind-produced landforms ( aids satellite observations ) Simulations of orographic water ice and carbon dioxide clouds.The second component will investigate and/or exploreSoftware optimization of the MRAMS code ( tune it for maximum performance on hardware platform ) andAlternative hardware architectures for high-performance computingThe cluster will serve as a central research platform to investigate processor-to-processor communication overhead , memory contention of symmetric multiprocessors , cache coherence , and distributed processing .
Moreover , performance of novel processor , memory , and network topologies will be evaluated .
This grant supports acquisition of a research grade multi-wavelength laser Raman spectrometer .
The laser Raman spectrometer has two main features ( 1 ) multiple laser wavelengths ( 400 to 800 nm , visible range ) to complement the 1064 nm line of the FT-Raman spectrometer , and ( 2 ) microsampling .
The multiple laser wavelengths is accomplished through a standard 633 nm Ne He laser .
Notch filters will be used to get within 50-cm .
exp .
( -1 ) of the 413 , 568 , and 647 laser lines .
To minimize the cost , the standard operating mode of spectrometer will be the microsampling microscope .
For bulk samples , this provides the ability to spatially resolve the spectra to look for texture and variation in the sample .
For microsamples , this provides the micron level resolution required .
The microscope is equipped with an auto-focusing and xy-scan microscope stage that enables efficient collection of the spectra combined with the ability to perform automated xy-scanning of the surfaces of samples , greatly extending the power and flexibility of the spectrometer .
Finally , a heating and freezing stage allows temperature dependent studies to be conducted from -196 to 600 degrees C. This enables examination of thermal stability of samples as well as the effect of temperature on the material structure .
This laser Raman spectrometer will be heavily used in undergraduate and graduate teaching , as a core component in materials characterization courses that cover thermal and spectroscopic techniques of characterizing materials .
In this way nearly every student in the MSE department will use these new instrument systems The new spectrometer will also be used for a summer NSF-REU site , where 12 undergraduate students from all over the country come to ISU to learn about semi-conducting materials and devices.Raman spectroscopy combined with microsampling capability has been shown by many researchers to be a critical analytical tool in the study of bulk , surface , and micro samples .
Its power , flexibility , and non-destructive nature lend itself to wide spread use for nearly all classes of materials .
Recent advances in the development of highly efficient , tunable , reliable , compact , and cost effective lasers combined with high resolution and rugged grating monochromators and solid state CCD detectors has moved the use of laser Raman spectroscopy from the realm of highly skilled spectroscopists into routine use by practicing materials scientists and engineers .
Raman spectroscopy is particularly well suited for use in materials research due to minimal sample preparation , wide flexibility of sampling conditions ( low and high temperatures , low and high pressure , low and high magnetic field , etc .
) , generally very sharp well resolved lines for solid state samples , and its non-destructive nature .
Combined with a microsampling Raman microscope , Raman spectroscopy can be used extremely effectively in the careful study of surface chemistry , structure , morphology , texture , and even stress .
Proposal 0216839ITR Internet Disintermediation of Food Delivery - Spanning the Last MileKenneth K. Boyer , Michigan State UniversityTomas Hult , Michigan State UniversityDuring the eBusiness frenzy of 1998-2000 , numerous new , pure-play Internet grocers promised consumers they could buy groceries at prices equal to or lower than from bricks-and-mortar stores , while enjoying unparalleled convenience without having to leave the house .
The most prominent of these companies was Webvan , which reached a stock market value of $ 7.9 billion at the end of its IPO .
Webvan , Home Grocer , PeaPod and several other grocers made huge bets that selling groceries online was both a growth market and a new way of doing business .
Unfortunately , the widely publicized collapses of these high profile Internet grocers have illustrated the substantial gap between theory and practical application bridging the last mile to grocery consumers ' homes represents a substantial challenge .
At the outset , many difficulties experienced by online grocers can be fundamentally attributed to a lack of alignment between marketing and operations strategies .
In contrast , several examples also exist of grocery and other food delivery companies that appear to be making effective use of the Internet as a link to customers .
In particular , both Tesco ( a British grocer ) and Albertson 's ( a U.S. grocer ) currently have Internet channels for selling groceries that are profitable .
Whereas many of the failed Internet grocers seemed to be hoping for a large market share , Tesco and Albertson 's view Internet ordering of groceries more as a value-added complementary marketing channel.Our research project examines four cutting edge companies via case studies of their marketing and operations strategies , and via cross-sectional surveys of their Internet customers .
Approximately 1,000 Internet customers of each of the four organizations are to be surveyed to assess their experiences with online-based grocery home delivery .
Field studies of each organization will also be conducted via structured interviews and analysis of on-site data to assess operational components of food delivery .
As an outcome of the study , the project scope is to document best-practice marketing and operations strategies and activities in applying Internet ordering to food delivery .
As such , the data generated will provide important guidance to other companies regarding the best ways to match proactive and responsive marketing and operations strategies .
The benchmark data should be generalizable to a wide range of companies with characteristics similar to the grocery industry .
This Small Business Innovation Research ( SBIR ) Phase II Project will develop improved monolithic carbon electrodes for capacitive deionization .
Capacitive deionization technology ( CDT ) is a new method for purifying ocean and brackish well water .
In this process , a constant voltage is applied between two porous carbon electrodes , and soluble salts are collected on their surface , thus purifying the water .
The operating costs of CDT are roughly half those of reverse osmosis , the current system of choice .
Obtaining a reliable and plentiful supply of clean water is becoming a worldwide problem .
From this work , society ( both in the U.S. and worldwide ) will benefit from an inexpensive method of producing potable water from large existing reserves of brackish ( saline ) water .
Inexpensive mesoporous carbon electrodes could also be used in capacitive deionization for industrial processes such as boiler feed , as well as in electrical energy storage , such as in capacitive energy storage .
This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports the University of Illinois Urbana Champaign with the purchase of a time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometer ( TOF-SIMS ) .
The TOF-SIMS system will be capable of ultra-sensitive surface and in-depth analysis at high mass resolution , high lateral resolution and high molecular weight detection .
The instrument will be equipped with a UHV sample preparation chamber to perform in-situ experiments of film growth and surface treatments .
The proposed instrument will be equipped with a cold stage to meet the needs of users in the expanding research area of biomaterials .
The TOF-SIMS will be located in the Center for Microanalysis of Materials ( CMM ) which is part of the Frederick Seitz Materials Research Laboratory ( FSMRL ) located on the Urbana-Champaign campus of the University of Illinois .
The FSMRL is an interdisciplinary research unit that has been very successful in enabling cross-disciplinary research and collaboration involving about 130 faculty research groups distributed among seven academic departments .
The TOF-SIMS is critical to many research programs active at the University of Illinois such as ( 1 ) Nanobiology Assays ; ( 2 ) Molecular Engineering ; ( 3 ) Growth of Individual Neurons in a Living , Cultured Neural Network ; ( 4 ) Silicon Nanotransitors ; ( 5 ) quantum wire structures ; ( 6 ) Nanoscale Quantum Dot Heterostructures ; ( 7 ) Alternative Gate Dielectrics ; ( 8 ) p-doping of GaN-based Nitride Semiconductors with Mg ; Failure mechanisms in transition-metal ( TM ) nitride diffusion barriers and corrosion-resistant layers ; ( 9 ) Microchemistry of large area solar cell materials .
In addition to the above programs , the new instrument will see widespread use in many other graduate research and education programs .
It is estimated that annually 50-75 researchers will directly utilize the TOF-SIMS in their programs.This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports the University of Illinois Urbana Champaign with the purchase of a time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometer ( TOF-SIMS ) .
The TOF-SIMS system will be capable of ultra-sensitive surface and in-depth analysis at high mass resolution , high lateral resolution and high molecular weight detection .
The instrument will be equipped with an ultra high vacuum sample preparation chamber to perform in-situ experiments of film growth and surface treatments .
The instrument will be equipped with a cold stage to meet the needs of users in the expanding research area of biomaterials .
The TOF-SIMS will be located in the Center for Microanalysis of Materials ( CMM ) which is part of the Frederick Seitz Materials Research Laboratory ( FSMRL ) located on the Urbana-Champaign campus of the University of Illinois .
The FSMRL is an interdisciplinary research unit that has been very successful in enabling cross-disciplinary research and collaboration involving about 130 faculty research groups distributed among seven academic departments .
In addition , the new instrument will see widespread use in many other graduate research and education programs .
It is estimated that annually 50-75 researchers will directly utilize the TOF-SIMS .
A substantial literature explores various ways to estimate black-white wage gaps among men .
Social scientists realize that it is difficult to measure black-white differences in labor market opportunities among men because large numbers of less-skilled black men do not work and therefore do not report wages .
Thus , the sample of wages among black men is a highly select sample , and the resulting estimate of the average wage among black men is overstated because of this selection bias .
While much progress has been made on statistical methods for addressing this important measurement problem , it is striking that the literature deals almost exclusively with the data on men .
Many economists and demographers believe that selection bias is not a problem when measuring the black-white wage gap among women because black and white women have similar labor force participation rates .
This research will explore how racial differences patterns of labor force participation among women may affect measured black-white wage gaps among women even though overall levels of participation are the same among black and white women .
Preliminary results indicate that the relationship between labor force participation and family structure differs notably by race .
Married women who are raising children account for a disproportionate share of white women who do not work in the market .
Among black women , single mothers are over-represented in the sample of women who did not report any market work , and a significant fraction of black , single mothers who do not work in the market receive means tested government assistance in some form over long time periods .
My initial results come from the 1979 cohorts of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth ( NLSY79 ) .
By using data on wages over the 1988-92 period , I construct a wage observation for at least ninety percent of black women and over 90 percent of white women in the NLSY79 sample .
In addition , based on other data in the NLSY79 that describe family structures and income sources , I develop imputation rules that allow me to construct estimates of black-white gaps in both mean and median wages based on samples that include wage data for at least 95 percent of both the black and white samples .
Thus far , my work with the NLSY79 data suggests that the measured black-white gap in wages among working women seriously understates the absolute magnitude of the black-white gap in potential wages among women .
My findings are preliminary and apply only to one census year , 1990 , for women born in the years 1957-64 .
Thus , much work remains .
The research will address the following questions ( 1 ) How robust are initial findings concerning selection bias and the measurement of black-white wage gaps among young adult women in 1990 ?
( 2 ) How have changes over time in racial differences in selection patterns affected the measurement of trends in the black-white wage gap among women ?
( 3 ) How do racial differences in patterns of selection affect racial differences in wage growth over the life-cycle among women .
( 4 ) Has labor market discrimination against black women relative to white women increased , decreased , or remained constant during the past three decades ?
My research plan seeks to combine several of the NLS panel data sets as well as data from the Panel Survey of Income Dynamics .
These panels provide histories of work experience as well as histories of labor and non-labor income .
By combining the information in various panels , I will be able to replicate the work I have done with the NLSY79 using a broad range of age groups over the census years 1970 , 1980 , 1990 , and 2000 .
Early results suggest that black women may not have made as much progress during the 1970s as previous studies suggest .
Further , black women may not have experienced losses in relative labormarket status during the 1980s and 90s even though many studies argue that they have .
The early urban settlements in the Near East provide an ideal laboratory for the study of long-term human-environment interactions because they offer an enormous array of archaeological and textual data that can be incorporated into an overall social , economic , and environmental analytical framework stretching over several millennia .
This research project will model and attempt to explain trajectories of development and demise of Bronze Age settlement systems for both the rain-fed and the irrigated zones of modern-day Syria and Iraq .
The project goals are to develop a holistic , dynamic , object-based model that can help determine the conditions under which societies became more or less urban or even collapsed .
The investigators will examine why third and fourth millennium B.C .
cities in the irrigated zone of southern Mesopotamia grew to a greater size and complexity than those in the rain-fed north .
Traditional models often view cities as being founded by an over-arching authority .
Although the model will test such a top-down perspective , the project will emphasize settlement system development from the ground up .
Concepts of complex adaptive systems will be used to test the hypothesis that systems of early cities and their regions co-evolved in an intimate relationship with their environment , primarily by means of aggregation through time of smaller fundamental units ( households ) .
Agent-based modeling will allow a wide range of choices and trajectories to contribute to the outcome of the modeling exercise .
Simulation will employ advanced object-based frameworks ( DIAS and FACET ) designed by the Decision and Information Sciences Division of Argonne National Laboratory .
The DIAS framework allows a range of simulation models and other applications to work together to address a complex modeling problem .
It will incorporate climate ( GCM ) , weather ( MM5 ) , hydrological and agricultural ( EPIC / SWAT ) , and demographic models plus agent-based models of social behavior built using the FACET framework .
Input data will be derived from the large corpus of landscape data , epigraphic data , and regional-scale environmental studies housed within the Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago and elsewhere .
The simulated settlement system will be validated against the archaeological landscape as it has been recorded by field surveys and satellite remote sensing .
By the end of the project , investigators expect to have developed a general modeling framework with an associated user interface that will enable interactions between humans and the environment to be rigorously tested over periods as long as several millennia.The expected result of this work , improved understanding how humans interact with dynamic ecological and climatic mechanisms , is fundamental to ecological management and is applicable very broadly .
In addition , studies of the interplay of coupled human and natural systems as a cause of collapse of past societies are also of fundamental importance .
Cities and their hinterlands are among the most complex coupled natural and human systems , and urban systems will continue to play an increasingly important role in shaping the future of the planet .
This project will provide new insights into the complex interactions between people and their environment , and it will contribute to the study of urbanization past and present .
The proposed modeling framework also has potential utility as an educational tool , because it will enable both academic and general users to interact with complex environmental , cultural , and socio-economic databases in order to simulate the growth of settlements and cities and to analyze long term concepts of sustainability .
This project is supported by an award resulting from the FY 2002 special competition in Biocomplexity in the Environment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems .
ABSTRACTA grant has been awarded to Dr. Alexander Fernald and co-principalinvestigators Dr. Laurie Abbott , Dr. April Ulery , and Dr. Clint Loest at NewMexico State University to acquire major research instrumentation to analyzewater , soils , and biomass for environmental research , monitoring andassessment .
The awarded funds will enable purchase of four researchinstruments 1 ) a Flow Injection Analysis System with ion chromatograph for analysis of major cations and anions in water , soils , and biomass ; 2 ) a Nitrogen/CarbonAnalyzer for determination of N and C in soils and biomass ; 3 ) a Laser Diffraction Particle Analyzer for measuring particle size distribution of suspended sediment and soils ; and 4 ) an X-Ray Fluorescence Spectrum Analyzer for analysis of metals in liquids , soils , and biosolids .
The instrumentation will support research that has the goal ofproviding information to 1 ) reduce negative environmental effects of land usepractices , and 2 ) enhance quality of natural resources in New Mexico and thearid Southwest .
Land use impacts on water , soil and biomass threatensustainable economic use and ecological health of rangeland , forest , agriculture , and wildlife in New Mexico .
Water quality is a growing concernwith increasing competition for limited water supplies and decreasingavailability of high quality irrigation and drinking water .
Rapidly growingdairies in New Mexico generate large amounts of animal waste , and pollutionfrom confined animal production threatens water and soil resources .
Metalcontamination is a problem in areas of New Mexico with naturally high mineraloccurrence and in areas impacted by mining , military , and agriculturalactivities .
As a minority-serving land grant institution , the mission of New Mexico StateUniversity is to conduct meaningful research , to educate and train scientists , and to extend information to the citizens of the state .
The state-of-the-artinstrumentation will provide a leap forward in the ability of universityinvestigators to conduct needed environmental research and fulfill the missionto educate .
The instrumentation will initially support the research activitiesof four investigators , faculty in three departments , and federal researchers .
It will be used to train graduate and undergraduate students in the use of theinstruments as part of their research .
Obtaining this equipment will increaseNMSU competitiveness for future grant proposals .
The equipment will supportresearch to provide critical information that will allow agencies , communities , and individuals to participate in meaningful and sustainable programs thatreduce negative environmental effects of land use practices and that enhancethe quality of water , soil and biomass resources .
This Small Business Innovation Research ( SBIR ) Phase II project will focus on developing polymer coated superparamagnetic nanobeads for isolation of biomolecules ; namely cells and nucleic acids .
The superparamagnetic nature along with the nano size of the particles offers low remnant magnetism , magnetization at low fields , and larger active surface area per unit volume .
A proprietary microwave plasma synthesis technique was adopted to reduce these nanospheres and the feasibility of the technique was established during Phase I .
Process scale up and extensive cell/DNA isolation testing will be the main R & D objectives for the Phase II project .
Industrial partners will evaluate beads produced to evaluate parameters , which are critical for transitioning the technology to an immediate useful product .
The commercial potential of polymer coated nanospheres can be used in various separation modules .
This technology could also be extended to isolation and detection of pathogens in water .
With support from the Major Research Instrumentation ( MRI ) Program at NSF , and the Department of Defense , Profs .
Gina Hoatson and Robert Vold at the College of William and Mary will acquire a high field ( 18 tesla ) , multinuclear solid state nuclear magnetic resonance ( NMR ) Spectrometer .
This equipment will enable researchers to carry out studies on a ) ferroelectric and piezoelectric materials ; b ) high performance carbon nitride films ; c ) technologically important conducting polymers ; and d ) biologically important amino acids and cyclic dipeptides .
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance ( NMR ) spectroscopy is the most powerful tool available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules .
It is used to identify unknown substances , to characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules , and to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution .
Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential for carrying out frontier research .
The results from these NMR studies will have an impact in a number of areas including development of wear-related coatings , ultrasonic transducers and electronic actuators , and electrochromic devices .
In addition , amino acids and cyclic dipeptides are important to study because these model systems yield insight into problems of protein folding , molecular recognition and enzyme activity .
Abstract A grant has been awarded to Dr. Edward Boyer at Prescott College to acquire equipment and instruments necessary to support research in the areas of marine ecology , marine conservation and management , and community outreach at the Kino Bay Center for Cultural and Ecological Studies ( the Prescott College field station on the Gulf of California ) .
The primary instruments to be purchased fall into three categories .
First is a GPS base station , associated hand held units , computers , software , and set up service .
This instrumentation will allow us to time/base correct GPS data and serve as the Base Station for this region of the Gulf of California which has no such base station within a 500km radius .
The work done will support mapping of islands , and coasts , desert vegetation , and tracking of marine mammals .
The second set of instruments is to be utilized in our Fin Whale photo identification project in the Midriff Island region of the Gulf .
These instruments include boat motors , cameras , plankton and physical oceanographic sampling devices , binoculars , and spotting scopes .
The third set of instruments include microscopes , cabinets , herbarium supplies , and a small inflatable boat to support ongoing research on commercial crab growth and reproduction in nearby mangrove estuaries .
All of these research projects are in cooperation with Mexican Federal ( Instituto Nacional de Ecologia ) , and local agencies and NGO's Currently , research at the Center has two major foci , 1 ) Isla Alcatraz - island inventory , conservation , and community based management plan development and 2 ) Fin Whale ( Balaenoptera physalus ) photo identification .
The island is small ( about one half square km .
) , volcanic island , about 1.4 kilometer from the town of Bahia de Kino .
A primary focus of this research is on nesting cormorants , egrets and herons on the island .
A biological inventory and detailed mapping of the island are also part of the project .
The majority of the users of our field station are undergraduate students and a small number of graduate students who overlap with and often assist visiting researchers thereby gaining invaluable field/ research training .
An important component of our research activities is the dissemination of information via environmental education projects in the local community , by way of presentations at conferences , and through our web pages on the Prescott College website .
This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research Program to Cornell University will allow several teams of investigators to develop x-ray diffraction instrumentation that will provide unique experimental capabilities and powerful general use equipment for use at the G2 experimental station at the Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source ( CHESS ) .
A six-circle diffractometer , two CCD area detectors , and a temperature- and environment-controlled sample stage will be built .
The diffractometer will allow for a very wide range of experimental configurations and will be the basic diffractometer for the G2 experimental station .
The area detectors will be used at G2 for a variety of different experiments , but will also be made available to users at other experimental stations easing a current very high over demand for such detectors at CHESS and at Cornell .
The stage will be able to hold samples at any temperature between 20 and 900 degrees C in a range of atmospheres during diffraction experiments and will also be used at different experimental stations .
Together , this equipment will be optimized for high resolution and time-sensitive x-ray diffraction work .
Initial work includes 1 ) studies of mechanical deformation , relaxation , and anelastic recovery , as well as interactions among microstructure development , phase changes , and solid state reactions in thin films and nanopattened structures , 2 ) studies of the evolution of strain and magnetic and electronic properties as a function of controlled oxidation in magnetic oxide thin films and nanostructures , 3 ) studies of formation and structure of highly ordered arrays by metal initiated self-assembly of ligand modified den-drimers , and 4 ) studies of the kinetics of interface growth of metal mono- and multilayers .
This equipment will be made available to outside users and to students , and will be used in outreach programs such as the Research Experiences for Teachers ( RET ) and Research Experiences for Undergraduates ( REU ) programs sponsored by NSF through the Cornell Center for Materials Research ( CCMR ) . % % % This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research Program to Cornell University will allow several teams of investigators to develop x-ray diffraction instrumentation that will provide unique experimental capabilities and powerful general use equipment for use at the G2 experimental station at the Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source ( CHESS ) .
This equipment will be optimized for high resolution and time-sensitive x-ray diffraction work .
It will be used to obtain rapid high resolution measurements of thermally induced phenomena in nanostructured materials , including strain , deformation , phase transformations , magnetic and electronic properties , film formation , and solid state reactions .
This equipment will benefit a large number of research groups at Cornell , and also external US and international collaborators .
It will be made available to outside users , to students , and will be used in outreach programs such as the very successful Research Experiences for Teachers ( RET ) and Research Experiences for Undergraduates ( REU ) programs sponsored by NSF through the Cornell Center for Materials Research ( CCMR ) .
Abstract0216553Auerbach , MichaelA grant has been awarded to Drs .
Michael Auerbach , Paul Verburg , John Arnone , Eric McDonald , and Christian Fritsen at the University of Nevada Desert Research Institute ( DRI ) , for the acquisition of three pieces of analytical equipment to be employed in current and future studies of nutrient cycling in terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems .
The equipment includes a flow injection ion analysis system , a dissolved organic nitrogen analyzer , and a laser diffraction particle size analyzer .
Specific goals that will be accomplished through the proposed equipment acquisition include the following ( 1 ) enhanced analytical capabilities to benefit ongoing research ; ( 2 ) pursuit of new research avenues in the field of physical and chemical characterization of dissolved organic and particulate nutrients in aquatic ecosystems ; ( 3 ) integration of terrestrial , hydrologic , and air research within the university system of Nevada to address environmental research questions ; and ( 4 ) establishment of a training facility for undergraduate and graduate students.Faculty from DRI are engaged in a wide array of studies focused on nutrient cycling in terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems .
Currently funded research includes assessment of nutrient loadings in rivers and streams , effects of management on nutrient cycling in terrestrial ecosystems , nutrient cycling in extreme environments , and interactions between climate and terrestrial ecosystems .
These studies are carried out in a variety of ecosystems including high elevation semi-arid watersheds , deserts of the southwestern U.S. , tallgrass prairie , and the Antarctic .
These diverse studies share a common need to assess nutrient composition and particle size distribution of soils , particulate , and suspended nutrients in lakes and streams .
Currently available equipment at DRI does not allow for routine analyses of inorganic and organic nutrients that are needed to satisfy the increasing demand for these data .
In addition , the methods in use for particle size analysis do not provide the detailed information needed for many ongoing and new studies.Graduate student research training is an important part of the research enterprise at DRI .
Graduate students will be trained in operating the equipment as part of their curriculum .
A laboratory technician will be assigned to operate and maintain the equipment and will be responsible for training graduate students in conjunction with the principal investigators .
The new equipment will greatly enhance DRI 's analytical capabilities in soils and water research by creating an infrastructure that will support a series of fundamental studies .
The requested equipment also has applicability to other areas of inquiry currently ongoing at DRI including research on dust emissions in deserts and transport of radionuclides in soils .
Further , this new equipment will allow DRI to contribute to solving critical state and national environmental problems ( e.g. , increasing demands for drinking water , protection of endangered fish species ) .
This Small Business Innovative Research ( SBIR ) Phase II project will develop full waveform models and minimal sensor algorithms for the General Dynamics - Advanced Technology Systems ( GDATS ) eddy current sensor ( ECS ) .
These algorithms will enable the practical real-time high performance health monitoring for turbine engines .
Current processing techniques could require four or more sensors ; however , these approaches do not make use of all the information made available by the ESC .
Using the full ECS signature , it is possible , in theory , to estimate integral vibration frequency , phase and amplitude using only a single sensor .
The reduction of the number of sensors required in each engine stage could potentially save millions of dollars over the life of the engine.There are no systems commercially available today for continuous health monitoring of gas turbine engines .
Once in use , this system will allow pilots to react immediately to critical engine health problems thus avoiding potentially catastrophic engine failures and loss of lives .
The minimal sensor algorithms for continuous health monitoring have a large market spanning the aviation industry , as well as the rapidly expanding power industry .
0216197ChilkotiA group of investigators at Duke University and North Carolina State University request funding to purchase an imaging X-ray photoelectron spectrometer ( XPS ) for the shared use of faculty .
This request is motivated by an urgent need for contemporary surface analysis tools , especially XPS , in the research of participating faculty and the lack of such instrumentation currently at Duke University or in the Research Triangle area for shared use .
The proposed Axis Ultra ( Kratos Analytical Inc. ) instrument allows XPS of both conductors and insulators with an energy resolution of < 1 eV and a spatial resolution of ~10 um .
This instrument will be used by the research groups of nine faculty at Duke University in the following departments Biomedical Engineering ( Chilkoti , Reichert and Truskey ) , Chemistry ( Craig , Grinstaff , Liu , and Pirrung ) , Materials Science and Engineering ( Zauscher ) , and Electrical Engineering ( Massoud ) .
In addition , two faculty at North Carolina State University in Chemical Engineering ( Genzer ) and Chemistry ( Gorman ) are also core investigators in this proposal , because of their pressing need for high spatial- and energy-resolution XPS in their research .
The instrument will be located in the Shared Materials Instrumentation Facility in the Levine Science Research Center at Duke University , and will be used in diverse projects that require high spatial and energy resolution XPS .
This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports instrument development at to Arizona State University .
The instrument is a solid-immersion lens ( SIL ) microscope for optical spectroscopy with a spatial resolution of at least 200 nm .
The SIL microscope will feature an autofocus system and active control of the SIL-sample separation .
These innovations will make optical spectroscopy with nm-scale spatial resolution routinely practicable .
The proposed applications will emphasize Raman and fluorescence imaging .
SIL-based micro- Raman spectroscopy offers a spatial resolution comparable or better than Near Field Scanning Optical Microscopy .
The signal strength for SIL-based spectroscopy increases as the spatial resolution is improved .
Furthermore , the SIL microscope makes it possible to collect spectroscopic images directly on a detector by using a global illumination technique .
Initial areas of application include carbon nano-tubes , Ge and SiGe quantum dots on silicon , and the optical properties of photosynthetic membranes .
The instrument will be build by graduate students who will gain valuable experience in instrument development.This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports a project to design and build a Solid Immersion Lens ( SIL ) microscope for spectroscopic imaging with a spatial resolution of at least 200 nm .
There is a critical need for such an instrument because the wavelength of light can be measured with unmatched precision , so that optical spectroscopy is one of the preferred techniques for the study of materials .
However , diffraction effects pose a fundamental limit to the spatial resolution of any optical technique , and for conventional instruments this means that it is generally impossible to obtain spatially resolved spectroscopic information from nanoscale objects.An alternative technique to overcome the diffraction limit is the use of optical fibers with nanometer-size apertures .
The SIL-microscope will have two fundamental advantages over this approach a much higher light-throughput and the ability to record spectroscopic images without physically scanning a fiber tip over a sample .
The instrument will be build by graduate students who will gain valuable experience in instrument development .
Human activities are widely recognized as a major force behind rapid landscape changes and loss of biodiversity around the world , including those in numerous nature reserves .
Many studies have found that government policies can significantly shape human activities , but most of those studies have focused on a single policy at a time and ignored the interactive effects among various policies .
Little is known about the complex interactions among the effects of multiple policies on the spatial-temporal dynamics of biodiversity such as wildlife habitat .
Studying the interrelationships of various policies for biodiversity conservation is critical and urgent because multiple policies often are implemented simultaneously .
These policies may be nonlinearly complementary or counterproductive .
An excellent site for studying such interactions is Wolong Nature Reserve in Sichuan Province in southwestern China .
The reserve , which is 200,000 hectares in size , is one of the largest homes to world-famous endangered giant pandas and several thousand other animal and plant species .
There are also more than 4,000 local residents and a variety of human activities in the reserve , such as farming and fuelwood collection .
Since the establishment of the reserve in 1975 , human population size has increased by more than 70 percent .
This rapidly increasing human population plays a novel and unique role in degrading the pandas ' habitat .
To prevent further degradation of panda habitat and promote habitat restoration , the Chinese government is implementing three conservation policies in the reserve an eco-hydropower plant program ( to eliminate fuelwood consumption ) , a natural forest conservation program ( to prevent illegal forest harvesting ) , and a grain-to-green program ( to return cropland to forest ) .
The interactive effects of these policies on local people and panda habitat are uncertain , however .
The objectives of this research project are ( 1 ) to assess the interactions among the three policies and local residents ; ( 2 ) to evaluate the interrelationships between local residents and panda habitat ; ( 3 ) to examine the need for and feasibility of policy modification and improvement ; and ( 4 ) to model and simulate multi-scale interactions among policies , people , and panda habitat across space and time .
The methods to be used in this study include field observations , face-to-face interviews with stakeholders , geographical information systems , remote sensing , global positioning systems , statistical tools , systems modeling and simulation , and advanced computer visualization techniques .
In addition to addressing many fundamental ecological and socioeconomic questions , the research will be tightly integrated with the education of students from elementary school to graduate school as well as outreach to various stakeholders from local to international levels .
The project will have significant implications for biocomplexity theory , methodology , and application .
In terms of theory , this project will shed light on complex patterns and interrelated processes ( e.g. , nonlinearity , thresholds , feedback , uncertainty ) among multiple policies , humans , and wildlife habitat at multiple spatial and temporal scales .
Regarding methodology , the research will take a systems approach by integrating multidisciplinary methods and advanced technologies to investigate the complexity of the study system .
With respect to application , the project will provide practical information for conserving panda habitat in Wolong , and it will provide useful insights for designing and improving policies that attempt to balance the needs of biodiversity conservation and economic development in the world 's most populous nation .
The findings also will be of general interest to many other parts of the world because of escalating human pressures and increasingly complicated human-nature interactions .
This project is supported by an award resulting from the FY 2002 special competition in Biocomplexity in the Environment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems .
This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program will enable groundbreaking experiments that seek to apply the bottom-up approach of atomic and molecular manipulation to several focused areas in science and technology .
The primary experimental apparatus for these investigations is a custom-built low-temperature scanning probe microscope capable of both studying and controlling matter at atomic length scales .
The tunneling mode of the apparatus will be exploited to perform scanning tunneling microscopy ( STM ) within an environment comprised of ultra-high vacuum , ultra-low temperature down to 500 mK , a high magnetic field up to 14 T , and a multiple-probe sample stage for performing simultaneous electron transport measurements .
Achieving these challenging conditions requires the acquisition of the specialized equipment described in this award .
Undergraduate and graduate students working directly on these projects will integrate and operate the proposed instrumentation to perform state-of-the-art experiments .
In synergy with these laboratory components , this instrumentation will critically augment a substantial educational and outreach program already being implemented by the PI and Stanford University. % % % This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program will enable groundbreaking experiments that seek to apply the bottom-up approach of atomic and molecular manipulation to several focused areas in science and technology .
This scientific effort is interdisciplinary in nature , centering on physics and materials science but involving ideas , techniques , and conundrums from other fields such as chemistry , engineering , and information technology .
The primary experimental apparatus for these investigations is a custom-built scanning probe microscope capable of both studying and controlling matter at atomic length scales , requiring the acquisition of the specialized equipment described in this award .
Undergraduate and graduate students working directly on these projects will integrate and operate the proposed instrumentation to perform state-of-the-art experiments .
In synergy with these laboratory components , this instrumentation will critically augment a substantial educational and outreach program already being implemented by the PI and Stanford University .
Through these multifaceted contacts between the research agenda , students , and people outside the laboratory , the proposed instrumentation will have a broad and unique impact beyond the traditional realm of experimental science .
In recognition of the importance of this award , Stanford University is providing cost-sharing funds amounting to 50 % of the funds provided by NSF .
Agrarian transformations represent the most pervasive alteration of the Earth 's terrestrial environment during the past 10,000 years .
Many current conceptualizations of these transformations assume a simple linear model , however , positing that change is driven by present-day economic , demographic , and technological conditions .
This interdisciplinary research project will trace the effects of the introduction , spread , and abandonment of agriculture at six sites in the U.S. , with comparisons also made with comparable sites in Mexico and France .
The U.S. sites are members of the Long-Term Ecological Research ( LTER ) network .
This project incorporates an integrated , long-term cycle that includes land-use change affecting landscapes , altered landscapes affecting ecological processes , and both influencing the ways in which humans monitor and respond to their surroundings , which engender further cycles of change .
The central objective of this research is to identify and quantify the ways in which these integrated cycles differ across cultures , across biogeographic regions , and across time .
A suite of quantitative and narrative analyses will be used to identify the prime determinants of long-term dynamics , present-day patterns , and reservoirs of ecological and social resilience in these systems .
Analytical approaches will include structural-equation modeling , analysis of spatial and causal effects , and cross-site comparisons of case studies .
As a practical test of the project 's results , approaches and insights that includes an emphasis on eco-regional planning and scenario building will be examined in the context of conservation planning at The Nature Conservancy ( TNC ) .This project will contribute to both science and society in many ways .
It will demonstrate the importance of social science information and approaches in ecosystem investigations , expanding the results of the LTER network and breaching the divide between social and natural science .
The data protocols developed will also benefit other communities of social and natural scientists through the involvement of the Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social Research ( ICPSR ) , a major national repository of social science data .
This project will help to develop general theories on how socio-ecological legacies , as well as lags in the recognition of and response to change , vary across space and time .
Through detailed case histories and quantitative analyses , the project expects to provide convincing evidence that humans act not only to disturb ecosystems but also monitor ecosystem values and respond to maintain stability and minimize crises .
Project results will provide information of direct use to policy makers , TNC , and land managers by using an approach that explicitly relates socio-ecological processes to varying levels of political organization .
The cross-scale data collection and analyses are expected to demonstrate that some patterns of human-ecological interactions are surprisingly long term , vary across space and time , and are non-linear .
The project 's most significant long-term contribution may prove to be through education ; as this project will train new interdisciplinary scientists at all levels of the educational spectrum , inform public officials , and contribute to more effective land-management practices .
This project is an award resulting from the FY 2002 special competition in Biocomplexity in the Environment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems .
A new area of operations research is financial engineering , whose origin goes back to the landmark papers of Markowitz , Merton , Black and Scholes ( which were awarded two Nobel prizes in Economics ) .
It uses mathematical , statistical , computational methods and algorithms , along with economic principles and intuition , to study complex problems in the financial service industry and to help other industries to better manage their financial risks .
The research , which focuses on the development of stochastic models in financial engineering , consists of three projects ( 1 ) Using jump diffusion processes to model asset ( e.g .
stocks , bonds , etc .
) prices .
The goal is to improve the empirical performance of the classical Black-Scholes model based on the normal distribution , while still retaining analytical tractability .
( 2 ) Using renewal theory to price discrete path-dependent options , such as discrete barrier and look back options .
The goal is to get accurate analytical approximations and fast algorithms to price complex financial contracts .
( 3 ) Using birth-death processes to model growth stocks ( e.g .
biotechnology and Internet stocks ) .
The goal is to explain an empirical puzzle reported in the Wall Street Journal , and to try to understand the recent burst of the `` internet bubble '' .The United States holds a leadership position in financial services industry , an important sector of the service economy ; future preeminence in this industry will rely on innovation in financial services and in the technology that supports these services .
This research aims at developing mathematical tools that can be implemented by the financial service industry to better understand complex financial products , and to better manage financial risks for both financial and non-financial companies .
The emerging field of financial engineering is attracting many bright students and professionals in engineering , mathematical and physical sciences .
The field presents interesting new research challenges and many opportunities to see academic research impact industry practice .
The research is integrated with the PI 's educational activities at both the doctoral and master level , and seeks to meet a high academic standard while addressing issues of practical importance and providing graduate training that will prepare students for research careers in either a university or industry .
0216176BonnerTexas A & M University-Corpus Christi , in collaboration with the University of Texas at El Paso and CODAR Ocean Sensors , proposes to extend High Frequency ( HF ) Radar data processing and hardware to improve the measurement of surface currents and wave conditions , and to incorporate directly into radar data output both transport and water quality model coefficients .
The collaboration between these Minority Institutions and Industry partner will extend HF-Radar applications to predict the origins and fates of oil spills , water quality , thermal and contaminant plume tracking , study coastal processes , and develop improved techniques of real-time management , display and distribution of HF-Radar data .
In addition , the extended HF-Radar system will improve navigational safety for Texas ports and waterways , which involve complicated hydrodynamic systems with shallow enclosed , embayment features .
SummaryThe proposed research will investigate the ability of a vertebrate to use gradients in the inclination or 'dip angle ' of the earth 's magnetic field ( defined as the angle between the magnetic field lines and gravity ) to determine geographic ( map ) position .
Previous studies of homing orientation have shown that magnetic inclination may be used to derive one coordinate of a navigational map .
To provide a more rigorous test of magnetic inclination 's role in providing map information , the effects of small changes in magnetic inclination on homing orientation will be used to estimate characteristics of the local gradient of magnetic inclination within an animal 's home range , e.g. , the home value of inclination and the alignment of the gradient .
These behaviorally derived estimates will then be compared with actual measured values obtained by mapping the spatial gradients of magnetic inclination around the sites where animals were collected .
A comparison of the response of animals collected at sites along the north-south and east-west axes relative to our testing site will also be used to help distinguish map and non-map effects resulting from changes in magnetic inclination , and to determine whether a true bicoordinate map is being used to determine geographic position .
The proposed experiments will contribute to a better understanding of the magnetic field 's role in the map component of homing .
These experiments will also help to determine the lower limits of the sensitivity of biological systems to variation in the geomagnetic field and , at a more general level , to determine the precision with which the vertebrate nervous system can measure the absolute values of physical stimuli .
Regulation of stomatal apertures by guard cells controls leaf gas exchange and modulates photosynthesis and plant water use .
Guard cells sense many environmental and hormonal signals through complex sensory transducing cascades .
Light is a major signal modulating stomatal responses .
Like many other plant cells , guard cells have a specific sensory transducing cascade that uses blue light as an environmental signal .
Recent , NSF-supported studies with guard cells have discovered that blue light-stimulated stomatal opening can be fully reversed by green light .
The green reversal can be observed in light-pulse studies If a pulse of blue light is followed by a green light pulse , stomatal opening is not observed , if the green pulse is followed by second blue light pulse , the opening response is restored .
The green reversal is also observed under continuous blue and green illumination .
In this case the reversal depends on the green light dose , with full reversal observed under a 21 green to blue light ratio .
The action spectrum for blue light-stimulated opening has the 3-finger fine structure typical of many blue light responses in plants .
The action spectrum for the green reversal also shows a 3-finger structure , red-shifted by about 90 nm .
The carotenoid , zeaxanthin has an absorption spectrum closely matching the action spectrum for blue light-stimulated opening , and carotenoid isomerization in a protein environment often red-shifts the absorption spectrum .
One of the objectives of this project is to determine the nature of the photochemical reactions mediating the blue-green reversal , the identity of the involved chromophore ( s ) , and the early sensory transducing events leading to the green reversal of blue light-stimulated opening .
The photochemistry of the early sensory transducing steps will be studied by HPLC , UV-visible , resonance Raman , and Fourier Transform Infrared Absorption Spectroscopy ( FTIR ) .
Several photoreceptor mutants such as npq1 and phot1 phot2 will be studied in order to determine whether their genetic lesions have impaired the blue green reversal response .
Another objective is to investigate whether the blue green reversal response in guard cells senses the bluegreen photon ratio of solar radiation reaching leaves growing in sun and shade conditions , and transduces it into acclimation strategies .
Success in these studies will characterize a new photobiological mechanism of plant cells , which could mediate plant acclimations and adaptations .
The recently discovered reversal of blue light-stimulated stomatal opening by green light offers a new understanding of the ways plant cells respond to light .
Detailed investigation of the photochemical reactions mediating the blue/green reversal could open the way for the unambiguous identification of a blue light photoreceptor in guard cells .
In addition , research on the blue/green reversal in the intact leaf could significantly enrich our understanding of ways by which leaves acclimate to sun and shade conditions .
Success in the research project supported by this award should significantly enrich our knowledge of plant function .
With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation program Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University will develop a new experimental tool for measuring colloidal forces .
An understanding of these forces is important in materials science , cell biology , soil science , waste disposal and water purification , ceramic engineering , the development of personal products , and in quality control in the microelectronics industry .
The instrument will combine capabilities of atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) and total internal reflection microscopy ( TIRM ) , while overcoming most of the drawbacks for each technique .
The instrument will provide a new capability the ability to measure adsorption isotherms during particle collisions .
The atomic force microscope is currently the most widely used method for measuring colloidal forces .
A major problem with this application is that the separation between the particle and the surface is not measured ; it is derived indirectly .
With this apparatus , the separation will be obtained directly , from the scattering intensity from an evanescent wave produced by totally reflecting a laser beam at the substrate/fluid interface .
This approach is based on the TIRM technique .
The TIRM technique will be improved through modulation of the scattered evanescent wave .
The adsorption of material to surfaces is the main method by which colloidal forces can be modulated , so it is useful to determine adsorption during particle interactions .
We will develop a technique for measuring adsorption during collisions using fluorescent tags on the adsorbates .
Graduate and undergraduate students will participate in this instrument development project.Many of the objects that we encounter in everyday life actually consist of very fine particles .
For example , bricks , paper , clothing , china , soil , most foods , cosmetics , and even humans are composed of small particles .
The physical properties ( e.g .
stiffness , flow , and workability ) of these objects depends on the forces between the particles .
Part of the process of creating new and improved products is the manipulation of the forces between particles to obtain desirable material properties .
The first stage of manipulating these forces is to measure them .
With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation program Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University will develop a new experimental tool for measuring the forces acting on particles .
The new apparatus will combine existing techniques , the force probe from Atomic Force Microscopy and the distance probe from Total Internal Reflectance Microscopy , and incorporate improvements through the use of signal modulation and fluorescent tagging of molecules .
A graduate student and undergraduate students will participate in this instrument development project .
This award , funded by the Office of International Science and Engineering , the Division of Environmental Biology 's Biotic Surveys & Inventories Program , and the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems Program , supports preliminary research to study the dynamics of climate and land-use change in the tropical Andes region in Peru and Bolivia in collaboration with teams of researchers from the Universidad Nacional San Antonio Abad el Cusco , Universidad Nacional Agraria , Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos , Herbario Nacional de Bolivia , Nacional Forestal Martin Cardenas , and Universidad Autonoma Gabriel Rene Moreno.Data needed by climate , ecosystem , vegetation researchers , and species distribution modelers will be collected and analyzed to gain insight on how global and regional forces affect local biodiversity .
It is anticipated that this work will facilitate interaction among a variety of research groups studying the Andes , and will provide general insight on the unique aspects of the Andean forests , the natural processes that produce and maintain life 's diversity , and their conservation .
This research in mathematical and computational gravitation seeks to make Einstein 's equations more useful for observations of the cosmos which will be coming to us within the next decade .
Professor York will focus on the study of formulations of the Einstein evolution equations that are mathematically rigorous and useful for large-scale numerical implementation and for systematic analytic approximation .
There are also significant improvements in the initial-value equations , the canonical action principle , and the Bianchi identities .
This work will exploit the methods of hyperbolic partial differential equations from the mathematical literature , generalized so as to apply to Einstein 's theory .
Development of certain fundamental concepts required for the existence of a rational general-relativistic statistical thermodynamics will also be studied .
There exists tremendous scope for advances in understanding and practical use of gravity theory , matching those in experimental and observational gravity and cosmology that have been , are , and will be continuing to occur .
It is such theory that this research will continue to find , to exhibit clearly , and to put to work in the next several years and beyond .
A grant has been awarded to the University of South Dakota Department of Biology , under the supervision of Drs .
Nepokroeff , Britten , Helenurm & Swallow , to acquire automated genetic analysis instrumentation .
The equipment will be used for automated DNA sequencing , genetic fragment and genotyping analysis ( e.g .
microsatellite detection , DNA finger-printing using AFLPs ) .
The equipment will be housed in the Biology Department , and will be used by an additional 17 faculty from USD 's Departments of Biology and Basic Biomedical Sciences .
The acquisition of this equipment at USD is especially significant because there is currently no such facility on campus , and no high-throughput facility in the state of South Dakota.Researchers in Biology at USD will address a number of important questions in evolutionary genetics , conservation biology and systematics using the genetic analyzer .
Specific projects to be addressed by Dr. Nepokroeff include the systematics of the carnation family , Caryophyllaceae , using molecular phylogenetic analysis of several different DNA sequences and phylogenetic approaches to study biogeography , ( colonization and dispersal ) in Pacific island species of the tropical shrub genus Psychotria ( one of the most species-rich genera of flowering plants ) .
Additionally , she will study conservation and population genetics of several Hawaiian plant lineages using AFLP and microsatellite markers .
Dr. Britten plans to address population genetic structure and genetic variability of several Federally endangered species .
He will be investigating the effects of population fragmentation through habitat loss and historical sylvatic plague infections in Black-tailed prairie dogs using AFLP and microsatellite analysis .
Additionally , he plans to examine genetic variation in trumpeter swans and sandhill cranes .
Dr. Helenurm will address population genetics and evolution of insular endemic plants .
He will use DNA finger-printing methods , e.g. , microsatellite and AFLP markers to examine levels of genetic variability in several species of flowering plants endemic to California 's Channel Islands , many of which are endangered .
He will also use AFLPs and DNA sequences to examine within-species ( or phylogeographic ) relationships for plant species in the Channel Islands , a system which is poorly known .
Dr .
Swallow will address questions concerning correlated evolution of morphological , behavioral and physiological traits in stalk-eyed flies ( family Diopsidae ) , wild relatives of the fruit fly .
He will use DNA sequences for reconstructing phylogenetic relationships among species and populations of stalk-eyed flies .
Secondly , he will use DNA markers ( AFLPs ) in a QTL study to determine the number of genes involved in traits related to species recognition and mate choice.The equipment will be used in original research by faculty , postdoctoral researchers , graduates and undergraduate students at USD , will be integrated into three courses in the USD curriculum .
The equipment will also be incorporated in several existing summer programs , geared to give research experiences to area minority high school students and their teachers .
The new equipment and proposed programs are anticipated to serve at least four area colleges with research expertise and experiences , in addition to the USD community .
Acquiring an on-site facility will enhance the PI 's competitiveness for federal research funds and attract new faculty and graduate students to USD 's growing research programs .
Thus , a genetic analyzer facility will have an enormous impact on the quality of research and educational programs at USD , will allow the PIs to integrate teaching and research at a high level , and will enrich the USD community in a diversity of ways .
With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation ( MRI ) Program , the Chemistry and Medical School Departments at the University of North Dakota will acquire a high-resolution tandem mass spectrometer ( MS/MS , QQTOF geometry ) with an atmospheric pressure ionization ( API ) source .
The system will be interfaced to liquid chromatography ( LC/MS/MS ) .
This equipment will enhance research in a number of areas including a ) the identification of selenium-containing proteins and related compounds in plants and in biological functions once they have been consumed ; b ) studies on the dopamine transporter protein ; c ) analysis of the biochemistry of 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal ( HNE ) and its metabolites ; d ) characterization of suprachoroidal fluid in chick eyes ; and e ) synthesis of C-glycosides , C-disaccharides , and related compounds .
Liquid chromatography with mass spectrometric detection ( LC-MS ) is an extremely powerful technique used for the separation and analysis of complex mixtures .
This will be the first instrument with high resolution MS and tandem MS capabilities in the entire state of North Dakota .
These studies will have a strong impact in biochemistry .
0216081Torres-LugoFaculty at UPRM involved in biotechnology and related areas have access to the Department of Biology Microscopy Center ( DBMC ) , located in the Physics Building , which houses a scanning electron microscope ( SEM ) and a fluorescent microscope .
The addition of a confocal laser microscope to the DBMC would provide a new state-of-the-art microscopy visualization tool to the life sciences and biotechnology research community at UPRM and the island of Puerto Rico .
0216316DrinkwaterThis is an exploratory project that will use meta analysis linked to modeling to provide a synthesis of the extensive literature published on carbon and nitrogen cycling processes in agricultural systems .
The expectation is to be able to predict the impact of changes in management practices on primary productivity , yields and global biogeochemical cycles .
Another product of this work will be to determine the impact of substituting N-fixation for mineral N fertilization .
0216207FlarendThis Major Research Instrumentation ( MRI ) grant provides support for investigations of possible alternative Aluminum compound source targets for subsequent Accelerator Mass Spectrometry ( AMS ) -based analysis of sputtered Al- ions to determine the isotopic abundance of the cosmogenic nuclide 26Al .
Aluminum-26 is a rare isotope that can be used to date exposed rocks surfaces .
The capability of AMS for high precision analysis of 26Al for surface exposure age dating has created something of a resurgence in the field of geomorphology where scientists have long struggled to nail down rates of erosional processes .
This effort will investigate two alternatives to the current standard Al2O3 source target for subsequent AMS analysis of 26Al , namely , aluminum nitride ( AlN ) and aluminum boride ( AlB2 ) .
Preliminary work conducted at PRIME Lab by the investigator has shown some evidence for much higher negative Al ion yield as a result of Cs+ sputtering of AlN and AlB2 targets than for standard alumina targets but potential isobaric interferences were not fully resolved .
The PI and an undergraduate student will therefore conduct further interlaboratory AMS analyses of AlN and AlB2 targets at the Purdue Rare Isotope Measurement facility ( PRIME Lab ) and at the higher energy Livermore AMS facility , GEOCAMS to further characterize new target materials .
In addition , they will conduct preliminary testing of storage , packing and loading of samples to assess possible sample degradation that would effect subsequent AMS analytical precision and accuracy and will disseminate the results .
*** This proposal provides funds for the purchase of a solid-state , frequency-stabilized , single-mode cw laser system that will have several applications within the context of an undergraduate research and education program .
The laser will be used to pump a 12 femtosecond Tisapphire laser for the research purpose of probing and modifying collective motion of atoms in solids using shaped pulses , ultra-short pulses , and optical control feedback techniques based on genetic algorithms .
The educational applications focus on optical trapping and acceleration of particles via a laser-tweezer technique , interferometry , and non-linear optics .
0216531JohnTexas A & M University-Kingsville ( TAMUK ) seeks NSF support for the acquisition of a gas chromotograph/mass spectrometer ( GC/MS ) .
The proposed GC/MS will include peripherals to enhance and supplement the research abilities of the department .
Research interests in the following areas would benefit immediatelyHydrocarbon characterization in the ambient urban atmosphere and the evaluation of voc/n0x ratios in Corpus Christi.Characterization of sorption and interphase mass-transfer of complex mixtures and their constituents for use in risk and remedial applications.Research project to evaluate potential fruit and nut organic compound bio-accumulation near contaminated groundwater sites.Control of ozone precursors using an enhanced oxidation - biofiltration technology .Innovative biofilter designs for chlorinated compound and dioxin precursor air emission control.Surrogates for dioxins furans monitoring from combustion emissions .
Chemical analysis of polar ice cores is one of the most useful tools for obtaining valuable information on paleoclimate history and atmospheric chemistry .
Measurements of major soluble chemical impurities are a necessary and integral part of almost all ice core research programs and projects .
Ion chromatography ( IC ) is the most effective analytical technique for measuring all major and some minor ionic chemical species in polar snow and ice samples .
Recently , melter-based continuous flow analysis ( CFA ) systems have been developed to increase chemical analysis speeds in order to meet the high demand for accurate , high-resolution ice core chemistry data .
Current CFA systems can not measure all of the major anions and cations in meltwater because of the limitations of the spectrometric ( UV-visible spectrophotometry and spectrofluorometry ) detection techniques .
Important species in polar snow that can not be detected by spectrometry include sulfate , methanesulfonate , magnesium and potassium .
This award supports a project to acquire several high-quality , commercial IC instruments to interface with a new ice core melting system to perform continuous , on-line ice core analysis for all major ionic species , including sulfate and methanesulfonate .
The project will develop an integrated ice core chemical analysis system based on continuous melting and on-line IC detection and determination .
Project plans are ( 1 ) to build a new ice core melter system , ( 2 ) to acquire the ion chromatographs , ( 3 ) to interface the ion chromatographs with the melter , and ( 4 ) to develop accessories , procedures and protocols for the integrated melter-IC system that can be used in routine lab analysis of ice cores and potentially in large field ice core programs .
NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0206679Mathematical Sciences Statistical modeling and predictability of nonlinear dispersive wavesAbstract0206679 CaiThe central theme of this research is the statistical predictability and the development of effective dynamics for spatially extended , multi-scale nonlinear systems in general , and nonlinear dispersive waves in particular .
Modeling complex behavior exhibited by multi-scale nonlinear dynamics often entails an effective description of large scale , coarse-grained dynamics .
Their resolution requires a precise mathematical characterization of all spatial and temporal excitations present in systems .
The issue of quantification of statistical properties of long-time , large-scale dynamics of spatiotemporal chaos will be addressed in a near-integrable setting and in a system in which the separation of scales , as well as instability , can be precisely tuned and controlled .
Once a good statistical characterization is obtained , it can provide not only guidance in modeling coarse-grained dynamics but also statistical calibrations of these effective models against the original full dynamics .
With these statistical insights , the research further focuses on the study of coarse-grained dynamics and invariant measures for two possible situations -- - namely , dynamics with and without separation of scales .
The projects also address important aspects of dispersive wave turbulence clarification of the derivation of kinetic equations and their validation ; and detailed characterization of resonance conditions , flux dynamics , and spatially localized , coherent structures.A multitude of spatiotemporal scales may arise in modeling problems in modern science , ranging from molecular dynamics simulation of protein folding to short term climate prediction for coupled atmosphere-ocean dynamics -- - the study of which has great impact on our daily world .
This project investigates mathematical methods that can be used to understand and predict the complicated behavior of systems of this type .
A grant has been awarded to Drs .
Ferran Garcia-Pichel and Jean M. Schmidt at Arizona State University , in collaboration with Dr. Richard M. Keller at NASA Ames Research Center to conduct a survey of the microbial diversity present in biological soil crusts of North America .
In arid lands , where plant cover is restricted , a half-inch thick live mantle of microbes develops in the topsoil that traps soil particles together and enriches the soils with organic carbon and nitrogen .
Known as biological desert crusts , they cover spaces between plants , stabilizing the soil against wind erosion and preventing formation of blow-sands .
There is presently a lack of knowledge regarding the microbial species inhabiting these important and widespread topsoil habitats .
In a variety of sites of North American deserts and semi-deserts , the investigators will embark in an effort to detect and document local bacteria important in terms of abundance or novelty .
For this , they will use modern DNA technology .
They will also attempt to cultivate those microbes in the laboratory .
Two repositories will be established .
A DNA database will enable the future recognition of crust microbes by other investigators .
Cultivated bacteria will be characterized with respect to their ecological role and properties , and will be deposited in public culture collections for the benefit of the scientific and biotechnology community at large .
It is expected that these documentation and repositories will constitute the base for improved knowledge of desert bacterial communities , complementing our understanding of desert ecology , facilitating sound rangeland management , and enabling bioremediation attempts in heavily impacted arid areas .
Over three years , Science Central is producing 624 television segments that will present current , ongoing research through local newscasts on ABC and NBC stations nationwide .
In addition to the regular research segments , ScienCentral will produce six sweeps series per year focusing on important new fields of research including nanotechnology , genetics/genomics , ocean science , global climate change and brain sciences .
An advisory board of scientists , teachers , science journalists and public information officers help inform the producers about individual stories and evolving fields of research , and they provide access to scientists and field research .
They also provide scientific input and check the stories for accuracy.To facilitate production and to assure that research is covered on an international basis , ScienCentral will establish a footage consortium to exchange science news video with major Canadian and European newscasters .
They also will provide the news stories to science centers for use in their interactive exhibits and web sites .
Dissertation Research Evolutionary Physiology of Heat-Shock Gene ExperessionDr .
Martin E. Feder & Daniel LermanThe proposed research will investigate a remarkable case in which transposable elements [ TEs , pieces of DNA that have the ability to move from one place to another within the genome ] have repeatedly but independently disrupted the promoter [ region controlling transcription ] of a gene encoding an inducible molecular chaperone [ a protein that prevents or alleviates damage to other proteins ; e.g. , Hsp70 ] , which in turn should affect tolerance of environmental stress and fitness .
This system has great promise as a model for investigating how large-scale differences in physiological traits arise from minor variation among individuals within populations .
Prior research has discovered 3 independent instances in which , in natural populations of the fruit fly Drosophila , TE insertions disrupt the spacing between heat-shock response elements in the hsp70Ba proximal promoter ; each such population exhibits distinctive Hsp70 protein levels .
For each population , the proposed research will develop replicate lines with which to ( 1 ) Quantify Hsp70 protein levels to test whether flies with TE-disrupted promoters express less Hsp70 ; ( 2 ) Determine whether TE-driven differences in Hsp70 expression affect inducible thermotolerance , a principle organism-level phenotype of Hsp70 ; ( 3 ) Determine , via specific ribonuclease protection assays , whether the TEs disrupt hsp70 transactivation [ transcription of the Hsp70-encoding gene ] ; ( 4 ) Measure whether , as predicted , TE-disruption of the hsp70Ba promoter enhances fitness in Drosophila not undergoing heat stress .
The proposed research will integrate molecular genetic , biochemical and physiological approaches , and be among the first to elucidate the link between intrapopulation regulatory sequence variation and phenotypic diversification .
AST 0206351PI CloseCurrently , the bulk of our understanding of dust in circumstellar disks comes indirectly through unresolved observations ( i.e .
observations that spatially confuse light from the disk and the star ) where there is little or no information as to the morphological and physical processes that the disks are undergoing .
The high contrast between the central starlight and the light scattered from the disk poses a difficult technical challenge , and , until now , this has prevented the efficient resolved detection of large numbers of disks .
The investigators will take advantage of a novel high-dynamic range imaging technique ( Adaptive Optics aided Wollaston polarimetry ) , highly sensitive to the polarized light scattered from a disk ( eliminating the contaminating unpolarized thermal emission from the star ) , developed by the group , to create a database of 60 high angular resolution , high sensitivity polarimetric observations of circumstellar disks around young stars from a variety of nearby star forming regions equally sampled over the age range of 100,000 -100,000,000 years .
This data will be expertly analyzed with help from the experienced and knowledgeable star formation group at the University of Arizona to extract physical disk parameters from the polarimetric data , such as the disk inclination , scale height , radial extent , density estimates , and dust size distribution .
With this new wealth of information , questions regarding the relationship between circumstellar disks and their environment , for example the parent star mass , the effects of a companion star , and the initial conditions for planetary formation , may be answered .
This project also includes the commissioning of a dual imaging polarimeter in the new University of Arizona near-infrared camera , to work in tandem with the adoptive optics system currently being developed for the 6.5 meter telescope on Mount Hopkins .
*** This research focuses on a novel splicing system thought to be common among eukaryotic cells but for which only a single example of a defined mRNA substrate has thus far been identified .
The primary goal in this work is to develop a systematic means for identifying additional substrates for this unique splicing system .
This novel splicing mechanism was first identified as a component step in a stress-response signaling pathway in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae .
A key step in this pathway , termed the Unfolded Protein Response ( UPR ) , is regulated splicing of the mRNA encoding a transcriptional activator ( termed Hac1p ) .
The result is to modulate levels of the Hac1p activator which , in turn , controls expression of the cognate stress response genes .
This splicing event is not mediated by the conventional mRNA splicing apparatus .
Instead , two distinct gene products , Ire1p and Trl1p , act as splicing endonuclease and RNA ligase , respectively , to carry out the splicing reaction .
Remarkably , the Ire1p is a transmembrane receptor that responds to changes in ligand binding by modulating its own splicing activity .
Thus , splicing is truly a component step in the signaling cascade that constitutes this stress response pathway .
Extensive evidence exists for conservation of UPR function among eukaryotes including the observations that yeast Hac1 mRNA can be accurately spliced in mammalian cells and recombinant human Ire1p accurately cleaves yeast Hac1 RNA .
Based on this conservation of function , it is hypothesized that ( 1 ) Regulated splicing may be a component step in UPR signaling pathways in all eukaryotes .
Thus , Hac1 homologues may be found in a wide variety of eukaryotic cells .
( 2 ) This splicing system may serve a variety of gene regulatory functions other than the UPR response .
Thus , regulated splicing of a variety of mRNAs may be mediated by this system .
These hypotheses can be tested by the systematic identification and characterization of splicing substrates from a variety of organisms .
The use of Trl1p as an affinity ligand in a selection/amplification approach will be tested as a means for conducting such a systematic analysis .
The experimental goals are as follows .
First , microarray analyses will be used as a comprehensive means for characterizing populations of Saccharomyces mRNAs enriched in a selection/amplification procedure .
Second , application of this approach to another organism and the utility of homologous versus heterologous Trl1 gene products as affinity reagents will be assessed .
Candida albicans has been chosen for this purpose based on the availability of appropriate genomic resources , its medial phylogenetic relationship to Saccharomyces , and on evidence for conservation of the splicing machinery in this organism .
The results of this exploratory research will make it possible to evaluate the significance of this splicing system as a fundamental stress response mechanism among eukaryotic cells and to assess the potential for additional gene regulatory functions for this novel splicing pathway .
Abstract Spatial heterogeneity and movement behavior can greatly influence predator-prey population dynamics .
Much progress has been made in understanding the consequences of spatial structure and exploiter behavior using experiments and models .
However , despite overwhelming experimental evidence that many prey modify their behavior in the face of predation risk , few models include this important feature .
Monarch butterfly larvae exist in a system that is well suited to exploring the effects of both predator and prey behavior in a spatially heterogeneous landscape .
Experiments will be performed involving monarch caterpillars and predatory wasps that will reveal the ability of predators to generate positive spatial covariance with prey .
Similarly , the ability of prey to generate negative covariance with predators will be measured .
Computer simulations and mathematical models will then be built that use this information in order to explore the consequences of incremental changes in spatial structure and predator and prey behavior ( e.g. , movement rate and distance ) .
Because many species migrate ( e.g. , birds , fish , ungulates , and monarch butterflies ) or immigrate ( e.g. , corn ear worms and other crop pests ) into patchy habitats , the focus is on the consequences of these important components of biological systems to single season dynamics .
The long-running and highly successful National Public Radio series Science Friday is venturing in new directions .
Given that basic research underlies all of the technological advances influencing our world and that tax dollars pay for that research , the public needs to be informed about the basics of research .
To address this need for public education , Science Friday will examine the importance of research as a theme underlying all science and technology changes byFinding the research roots at the bottom of each story ; Exploring the cooperation among corporations , private institutions , and research foundations and illuminating how each plays a role in the research process ; Following the research bumps along the road to illustrate that research success depends upon failures -- not all research produces positive results ; Illuminating the barriers to successful research ; Helping listeners understand the thought process of researchers ; Scaling the ivory tower by enabling listeners to question and talk directly with researchers ; and Helping listeners understand the role of basic research in policy-making.Ira Flatow , the host , will take Science Friday on the road and produce programs in Oklahoma , Iowa , Michigan , Massachusetts , Arizona and other locations .
He also will visit schools and universities and will speak at public events .
NPR also will reactivate the Science Friday Kids Connection which will take each week 's program and its guest scientists directly into classrooms across the country .
Habitat fragmentation and small population size may lead to a decrease in genetic variation and , consequently , the long-term viability of populations .
New molecular genetic techniques have been developed to identify changes in genetic variation over time from contemporary samples .
However , these techniques have rarely been tested in species in which both historic and contemporary patterns of genetic variation are known .
This research will examine the power of these techniques to reconstruct historic patterns of genetic variation in greater prairie chickens , a species of grouse that formerly occurred throughout the prairies of midwestern North America and is now found in fragmented populations , some of which are threatened with extinction .
Historic patterns of genetic variation will be obtained from mitochondrial DNA sequences of museum specimens collected prior to habitat fragmentation and population decline ( 1872-1950 ) .
These will be compared to already analyzed sequences from contemporary populations .
This analysis of both contemporary and historic populations will provide empirical support for several critical assumptions of new molecular techniques and an extraordinarily detailed picture of population processes during the decline of a threatened species .
From a conservation perspective , this information will also be essential for delineating management units and identifying populations that may be suitable for translocation programs .
DMS-0206963Clarence W. WilkersonJames E. McClureJeffrey H. SmithWilkerson ( in joint work with W. G. Dwyer of Notre Dame ) studies the classifying spaces of Lie groups and p-compact groups with the goal of finishing the classification of 2-compact groups and their automorphisms .
Wilkerson and Smith study actions of finite groups on arbitrary finite complexes .
The goal is to construct a moduli spacethat classifies actions with given fixed point data.McClure and Smith will continue their work on chain operads and chain models for homotopy theories .
Specifically , they propose to find a small chain model for the framed little-disks operad , to show that the category of unstable coalgebras over a certain chain operad is a model for HZ-local homotopy theory of spaces , to give a similar model for HZ-local spectra , and to create a chain model for the model category of K ( n ) -module spectra .
They also propose to investigate the properties of a symmetric monoidalstructure on the category of cosimplicial chain complexes.McClure uses the joint work with Smith to study the homotopytheoretic properties of the Snaith splitting .
He hopes to find a simplified proof of the theorem of Goerss-Hopkins theorem which gives the spectrum E ( n ) a commutative multiplication .
He also studies the rational homotopy theory of equivariant spectra when the group is the circle.Smith and Grodal are studying homotopy G-spheres .
That is , spaces that are homotopy equivalent to a sphere and have an action of a finite group G. They hope to give a complete classification based on algebraic invariants of the group .
They also study the moduli space of homotopy G-spheres.Homotopy theory is the most fundamental of all geometries .
It studies those geometric properties which do not change no matter what continuous deformations are made .
The equalityof donuts and coffee cups is a well known example .
Yet , surprisingly , geometry as studied by homotopy theory has an intrinsic algebraic nature .
The PIs study the geometric properties of spaces using techniques that come from algebra , with homotopy theory providing the bridge between these different areas of mathematics .
In fact , all homotopy information of a space can be described using algebra .
The algebra is complicated but homotopy theory gives a correspondence between geometry and algebra that has many important applications .
AST-0206048CrottsSupernova 1987A , the closest SN seen in nearly four centuries , and the most intenselystudied ever , is rapidly turning into a SN remnant as the ejecta from the explosion nowstrikes the circumstellar envelope shed by the star over the last million years .
We proposeto observe this process using a combination of optical , IR and UV programs , plus furtherspace-based studies ( supported by NASA ) .
These will allow us to map the structure ofthe envelope , both in its unperturbed state and as it is destroyed by the ejecta .
Thiswill allow the first complete study of SN remnant formation evolution ever undertaken.Our previous observations of the 3-D structure , velocities , density and composition willestablish the nature of the pre-explosion nebula and the mass loss processes that created it , while the excitation of this nebula by the X and EUV flux created in the collision will allowus to re-analyze it once more .
In addition to these unprecedented studies of a SN remnant , will continue to use light echoes from the SN explosion to explore the interstellarmedium in the 30 Doradus star-formation region , to study the echo of the UV pulse fromSN shock breakout through the progenitor star 's surface , and to accurately determine thedistance to the Large Magellanic Cloud { a fundamental rung on the extragalactic distanceladder .
*** This proposal requests funds for a Small Exploratory Research ( SGER ) proposal to support a rapid-response study to isolate and evaluate the sedimentologic and geomorphic impact of Hurricane Michelle on the coastal systems of Andros Island , Bahamas using ultra-high resolution remote sensing data calibrated by field observations .
Pre-storm ultra-high resolution remote sensing data are available to the PI and serve as a baseline for comparison .
Differences between the pre-storm data and the post-storm data acquired through this funding will serve as focal points for a week of field work that will characterize the geomorphic and sedimentologic attributes of the changes .
By integrating the map patterns of change and their sedimentologic characteristics , we will develop models for the impact of major storms on the stability of coastal systems , including but not limited to the shoreline .
These changes will also be compared with historical changes ( ~60 year ) recently documented by the PI.Results of this study will have implications for the stability of shorelines and entire coastal systems landward of the shoreline , the parameters that control the evolution of these systems , and the interpretation of the geologic record of tidal flats .
The need for rapid acquisition of the ultra-high resolution remote sensing data and the field validation to assess the hurricane 's impact make this proposal appropriate for an SGER .
The investigators will conduct a survey of genetic variation for a set of fitness related genes ( the Major Histocompatability Complex or Mhc ) in a locally threatened endemic canid , the Island fox ( Urocyon littoralis ) .
The goal is to understand the role that natural selection has played in maintaining variation in small populations .
This understanding will also allow for a more effective management of the endangered Island fox and other species that are declining or threatened .
An initial survey of polymorphism at the Mhc has revealed an unprecedented level of genetic variation in Island foxes .
The investigators will survey molecular variation of four Mhc genes in Island foxes using PCR ( polymerase chain reaction ) based techniques , and compare this to the null model of neutral genetic variation .
Mhc genes are integral to vertebrate immune function , and variation in the Mhc affects individual fitness ( e.g .
resistance or susceptibility to pathogens ) .
This study will attempt to illuminate , though direct observation and computer simulation , the strength of natural selection necessary to maintain genetic variation in a species with limited genetic variation .
These results will have direct implications for conservation and management of the Island fox , as well as provide a greater understanding of the extent of natural selection operating upon an immunologically important set of genes .
Over three years , in consultation with high school personnel , QCC Tech-ASCEND will select seven groups of high school students judged to be likely candidates for high technology industries or science careers .
The project begins with 25 students and expands to 75 students by the end of the third year .
These students will attend weekly two-hour sessions for 30 weeks during the academic year in which they will participate in sustained experiences that explore fiber optics , lasers , CAD/CNC machining and mathematics in a three-cycle program .
Experiences will be in an informal setting designed to excite as well as educate .
Participants will use a variety of high technology devices and instruments in both structured and non-structured activities .
Nontraditional students will be encouraged to participate , and several strategies will be employed to help them succeed .
In addition , there will be two mathematics anxiety workshops and twenty mathematics skills workshop sessions .
Faculty and student role models will be present .
Careful evaluation of attitudinal changes in participants and their parents , together with participant skill mastery , will occur throughout the project .
A sourcebook for parents and one for high school counselors and college advisors will be prepared and distributed , as well as videotapes describing career opportunities and educational issues .
AbstractFutuyma 0206448The researchers will test the mechanisms by which herbivorous insects affect the cost of resistance to the herbicide triazine in pigweed Amaranthus hybridus ( Amaranthaceae ) .
The triazine-resistance mutation imposes a cost by slowing photosynthesis .
Mutant plants are preferentially eaten by herbivores , are less tolerant of feeding damage , and suffer an increased fitness cost when exposed to herbivores .
This work will address how the availability of light and nutrients affects a mutant plant 's allocation to carbon-based defenses and its susceptibility to herbivores .
The potential for herbivores to impose frequency-dependent selection will be tested .
Additionally , the researchers will test if a mutant plant 's increased allocation to carbon acquisition ( i.e .
leaves ) at the expense of nutrient and water acquisition ( i.e .
roots ) causes its reduced tolerance .
This research will provide an independent test of how photosynthetic rate shapes patterns of defense and tolerance , and it will contribute to future strategies for managing resistance to herbicide.The researchers will test the mechanisms by which herbivorous insects affect the cost of resistance to the herbicide triazine in pigweed Amaranthus hybridus ( Amaranthaceae ) .
The triazine-resistance mutation imposes a cost by slowing photosynthesis .
Mutant plants are preferentially eaten by herbivores , are less tolerant of feeding damage , and suffer an increased fitness cost when exposed to herbivores .
This work will address how the availability of light and nutrients affects a mutant plant 's allocation to carbon-based defenses and its susceptibility to herbivores .
The potential for herbivores to impose frequency-dependent selection will be tested .
Additionally , the researchers will test if a mutant plant 's increased allocation to carbon acquisition ( i.e .
leaves ) at the expense of nutrient and water acquisition ( i.e .
roots ) causes its reduced tolerance .
This research will provide an independent test of how photosynthetic rate shapes patterns of defense and tolerance , and it will contribute to future strategies for managing resistance to herbicide .
PROJECT SUMMARYRecently , there has been growing interest in legume-rhizobia associations asmodel systems for studying mutualisms , but a central obstacle is that little is known aboutthe genetic structure of native communities .
We know that associations can be specificor promiscuous , but very few studies have described spatial or temporal variation innative rhizobia-legume communities .
We intent to examine levels of spatial andtemporal variation in communities of rhizobia and legumes in natural environments .
Wewill compare associations at various geographic scales , from within nodules to betweencanyons .
We will measure how associations change over time , considering variationbetween months , seasons , and years .
By considering specificity of associations and thegenetic structure of a native community , our goal is to better understand the potential forcoevolution to shape this mutualism .
The proposed work uses sequences from 1329strains from 15 plant species to characterize the effect of plant taxa , microhabitatdifferences , and seasonal differences on rhizobial genetic variation and specificity ofassociations .
We will contribute to the understanding of this imporant mutualism byseeking to describe natural systems in detail , characterizing rhizobial genetic diversity , and measuring the extent that specialization and generalization is achieved in naturallyevolving populations .
AST 0206177Freeman Resonance rings are important in most SB type galaxies .
In a simple analytic formulation or in simulation models , the rings result from a disk 's turning bar perturbation .
If the perturbation is not too strong , the disk gas clouds ' motions are reduced to a damped harmonic oscillation about the circular orbit .
Rings of luminous young stars occur via gentle cloud collisions which occur near oscillation resonances with the turning bar .
The projected ring morphology of a galaxy plus radial velocity data can give the galaxy 's three dimensional orientation , bar strength and pattern speed .
Formation of stellar associations is promoted in rings where gas clouds are crowded near the end ofthe bar .
As these associations orbit , they age as they move along the periodic orbits making up the rings .
Age determinations are important for checking star formationmodels in other galaxies .
In this project , Drs .
Tarsh Freeman and Gene Byrd will carefully model Hubble Space Telescope observations of the galaxy NGC3081 's inner and also outer rings , and they will theoretically investigate NGC 4736 and NGC 1291 , the two nearest resonance ring galaxies .
Byrd and Freeman have successfully simulated the self-gravitational aggregation of ring gas clouds into associations near the ends of the inner ring of NGC3081 .
Larger clumps can be made to form by increasing the contribution of the gas cloud disk to the total centripetal acceleration ( i.e .
increasing disk gas surface mass density ) .
Freeman and Byrd will extend these studies of the outer ring of NGC3081 and the rings of NGC 4736 and NGC 1291 to simulate formation of smaller associations , aging , and the importance of disk self-gravity relative to high velocity dispersion halo or disk components .
*** Neuroendocrine mechanisms underlying rapid change in social behavior ( 0206677 ) Principal Investigator John Robert GodwinDoctoral Student Katharine Anne SemsarBoth environmental and internal physiological influences affect the expression of sexual and aggressive behavior by animals including humans .
For species that live in unpredictable environments , the appropriateness of displaying sexual and/or aggressive behavior can change quickly .
A good deal of research has focused on adaptations to changes in the physical environment , but social environments can be equally unpredictable and it is therefore important that animals be able to adapt their behavior quickly in the face of social change as well .
A large body of work over the past twenty years has documented important roles for neuropeptide hormones in mediating social behaviors ranging from mating and parental care to mate guarding and territorial defense .
Two neuropeptide hormones found to play especially prominent roles are arginine vasotocin ( AVT ) in non-mammalian vertebrates and the very similar arginine vasopressin found in mammals ( AVP ) .
These hormones are released in the brain and act to alter neural function in areas known to be associated with social behavior .
While many studies have shown effects of these hormones on behavior in the laboratory , there are still relatively few studies that have examined the detailed mechanisms by which AVT or AVP affect sexual and aggressive behavior in the full complexity of the natural environment .
This study would explore mechanisms by which AVT affects sexual and aggressive behavior and the social and hormonal conditions that determine the nature of the effects of this hormone on these behaviors .
The experimental model is the bluehead wrasse ( Thalassoma bifasciatum ) , a well studied sex- and role-changing coral reef fish .
Bluehead wrasses exhibit socially controlled female-to-male sex change in which females can become functional males within approximately ten days of becoming socially dominant .
This model species has two principal advantages for the type of study proposed .
First , the dependence of the sex change process on cues from the social environment makes it a very good system for understanding social influences on neural function and the interaction of environmental and internal hormonal cues in controlling behavior .
Second , because of large populations in shallow , protected waters and extraordinary ease of capture for marking and experimental manipulations , bluehead wrasses allow the mechanisms underlying neuropeptide actions to be studied in nature .
Previous work by John Godwin has shown that AVT expression increases in the hypothalamus as females begin to exhibit male behavior and their ovaries become testis during sex change .
Studies by Katharine Semsar and John Godwin have shown that AVT can induce territorial aggression and courtship behavior in large males who do not hold territories while an AVT receptor blocker can reduce these behaviors in territory-holding males .
The studies outlined in this proposal would determine i ) whether AVT is necessary for females to become males behaviorally and whether augmenting AVT can accelerate this process , ii ) whether the ability to respond to AVT , as measured by receptors for this hormone , changes during sex change , and iii ) what the effects of a potent androgenic hormone that rises during sex change ( 11-ketotestosterone ) are on the expression of AVT and its receptor in the brain .
This work should improve our understanding of behavioral adaptation and the role of neuropeptide hormones in these processes .
These mechanisms are of strong basic interest , but also important more generally because of the societal costs of aggressive behavior .
AST 0206081MateoDwarf spheroidal galaxies ( dSph ) are likely to be the smallest systems in the Universe which contain both dark matter and luminous matter .
The dark matter content and distribution in dSphgalaxies can be studied in detail if one can collect enough kinematic data to constrain models .
Dr. Mario Mateo , at the University of Michigan , and Dr. Edward Olszewski , at the University of Arizona , will use three new technologies to make a factor of 10-30 advance in the number of stellar velocities measured per galaxy .
The goal is no longer to weigh the dSph 's , but to derive the distribution of mass , thus the distribution of the dark matter .
While small steps have been taken towards that goal to date , with heroically collected samples of up to 200 stars , it is only withsubstantially larger samples that reasonable models will be distinguished from each other .
Suchmapping of the mass within dSph galaxies is required to critically compare their dark-matter haloswith the many - sometimes contradictory - predictions of models of galaxy and large-scale structure formation in the Universe .
These researchers will use a new telescope - the Magellan 6.5-meter telescope of Las Campanas Observatory in Chile - a new echelle spectrograph - the Magellan-Inamori-Kyocera Echelle ( MIKE ) spectrograph - and a new 256-fiber system to feed this spectrograph a large number of stars simultaneously .
This instrumental combination will allow the collection of 750-1500 kinematic samples per galaxy .
*** Molecular markers ( mitochondrial DNA sequences ) are used to quantify population genetic structure in geographically widespread species of Anolis lizards ( anoles ) on each of four islands in the Greater Antilles .
Caribbean anoles provide an outstanding opportunity for testing the impact of ecological specialization on genetic structures of otherwise similar species using replicated observations .
Similar kinds of habitat specialists have evolved independently in anoles on each of the four islands in the Greater Antilles .
These specialists differ ecologically but are similar with regard to other factors thought to affect population structure ( i.e .
life history , geographic distribution , age of origin , reproductive behavior ) .
A species ' genetic structure has important consequences for many aspects of its biology , including its probability of giving rise to new species or going extinct .
The results of this study assess the importance of habitat specialization for production and maintenance of biodiversity in ecological communities , and the priority of habitat specialization as a consideration in conservation practices .
Project SummaryMany aquatic communities have been shown to be under top-down control , while most systemsdominated by vascular plants are assumed to be controlled by bottom-up forces .
For nearly50 years , the prevailing paradigm in salt marsh ecology has been that bottom-up forces , such as nutrient availability , are the primary determinants of marshgrass production .
Inthis proposal , we show that the standing crop of the dominant plant in western Atlanticsalt marshes is reduced wholesale and the substrate completely denuded when predators donot suppress densities of the most common grazing invertebrate in southeast marshes , theperiwinkle Littoraria irrorata .
Before these results can be generally accepted , however , the apparent contradiction between our observations that Littoraria graze extensively onlive Spartina and the current paradigm which holds that Littoraria is the most importantdetritivore in the marsh system must be resolved .
To do this , we present a detailedresearch plan to obtain a mechanistic understanding of the Littoraria - live Spartinainteraction .
Results from this study will likely force us to reevaluate our currentunderstanding of marsh systems and add critical information to the ongoing debate as towhether or not vascular plant communities are susceptible to run-away consumer effects .
This project focuses on the development of a new assessment instrument , applicable to multiple undergraduate engineering programs , to measure students ' understanding of statistics and its applications .
The statistical understanding measure developed under this research , called the Statistical Concepts Inventory ( SCI ) , provides score profiles that specifically describe students ' abilities to design and conduct experiments as well as to analyze and interpret data.This project is timely because an increasing number of post-secondary engineering programs are endorsing outcome requirements that depend on statistical thinking and problem-solving skills .
Within engineering , these requirements are precipitating major changes in engineering education in general and engineering statistics education specifically .
Engineering curricular objectives in many respects are being driven by the ABET EC 2000 criteria .
Of special relevance to the proposed project are- Criterion 3 , Programs Outcomes and Assessment , which states that Engineering programs must demonstrate that their graduates have ( a ) an ability to apply knowledge of mathematics , science , and engineering , and ( b ) an ability to design and conduct experiments , as well as to analyze and interpret data.and- Criterion 8 , Program Criteria , in which 16 of the 24 listed programs directly indicate the need to demonstrate that students have acquired facility with statistics .
Industrial Engineering has historically taught statistics as a service course to other engineering programs and continues to use statistics as a foundation for much of its own curriculum .
Recently approved are the Criteria for Accrediting Computing Programs ( Computing Accreditation Commission , December 30 , 2000 ) , which covers Computer Science programs and states in its curriculum standards that Course work in mathematics must include probability and statistics .
This project is also exploring the links between cognitive and attitudinal aspects of introductory statistics courses .
In its second phase , this project is gathering SCI profile scores from students in combination with an existing affective instrument , the Survey of Attitudes Toward Statistics ( SATS ) .
As tropical forests are cleared for agriculture , tropical trees become restricted to isolated islands of habitat .
If pollen and seeds do not move effectively among these fragments , local mating occurs , increasing inbreeding and the erosion of genetic diversity .
Inbreeding and reduced genetic diversity , in turn , can diminish seed production and seedling vigor , threatening population viability .
This study uses genetic markers to study how fragmentation affects pollen movement and inbreeding in three animal-pollinated tropical tree species in Costa Rica .
DNA fingerprinting will be used to determine pollen sources for seeds produced in forest fragments and how levels of inbreeding and genetic diversity are affected by pollen movement .
Comparing patterns of gene flow and seedling vigor between fragments and a nearby continuous forest will allow assessments of genetic threats posed by fragmentation .
Geographic analyses will show how patterns of gene flow are affected by fragment size and surrounding landscapes .
Declines in biological diversity represent a profound global threat .
This study will illuminate how habitat loss and fragmentation are affecting reproductive success , genetic diversity and inbreeding , all of which can reduce population viability .
Because they depend so obviously on animals for pollination and seed dispersal , tropical trees in forest patches are at particular risk of extinction .
As plants represent the foundation for biological productivity and diversity , such losses can result in cascades of extinctions .
The data from this study are thus needed to identify both proximal threats to tropical trees and to guide longer-term management .
This proposal deals with the design and analysis of efficient algorithms forthe class of hybrid systems called ( discrete-time ) piecewise linear ( PL ) systems .
The area of hybrid systems concerns issues of modeling , computation andcontrol for systems which combine discrete and continuous components.The subclass of PL systems , which we investigate in this project , provides one systematic approachto discrete-time hybrid systems , naturally blending switching mechanisms withclassical linear components.PL systems are of interest as controllers as well as identification models , and they can be thought of as arbitrary interconnections of finite automataand linear systems .
Tools from automata theory , logic and related areas of computerscience and finite mathematics are used in the study of PL systems , inconjunction with linear algebra techniques , all in the context of a `` PLalgebra '' formalism .
In this project , we will study basic algorithmicand computational problems for these problems with applications tomodelling of biological systems.More concretely , basic questions for any class of systems are those of equivalence , and , inparticular , whether state spaces are equivalent under a change of variables.This project will address various algorithmic and computational challengesrelated to this state-space equivalence and isomorphism problem for PLsystems , as well as questions of learnability and representability for suchsystems .
The project also suggests the use of PL models for differential geneexpression testing .
A grant has been awarded to Dr. Douglas Soltis of University of Florida and Mr.Michael Zanis of Washington State University to investigate the genes governing flowerdevelopment in primitive flowering plants .
Much is known about the genetics offlower development in the higher flowering plants , Arabidopsis ( thale cress ) andAntirrhinum ( snapdragon ) .
In contrast , little is known about the genetics of flowerdevelopment in primitive flowering plants .
Dr. Soltis and Mr. Zanis are focusing onisolating and characterizing MADS-box genes , a family of development regulatory genes , from two primitive flowering plants , Nuphar ( a member of the waterlily family ) andIllicium ( a member of the star anise family ) .
They have developed a method forextracting RNA from Nuphar and Illicium flowers , and are using degenerate polymerasechain raction ( PCR ) to amplify and obtain DNA sequences of MADS-box genes .
Therelationships of the MADS-box genes isolated from Nuphar and Illicium are compared toMADS-box genes isolated from other flowering plants .
Lastly , using RT-PCR Dr. Soltisand Mr. Zanis are characterizing the floral tissues in which the MADS-box genes areexpressed.Understanding the genes involved in flower development in primitive floweringplants , such as Nuphar and Illicium , is critical because of the insights they may provideinto the early angiosperm flower .
Moreover , elucidating the genetics of floraldevelopment in these key flowering plants not only will help to answer questionsregarding the origin and diversification of the flower , but will also provide theopportunity to link what is known about model flowering plant systems , such asAntirrhinum and Arabidopsis , with other flowering plants , providing a morecomprehensive picture of floral development .
AST 0206243SzapudiCurrent cosmological theories imply that the stars , galaxies and clusters of galaxies that we can see represent only a relatively small fraction of the matter content of the universe .
Most of the matter is in a form unknown to us , and can be detected only through its gravitational pull .
The nature of this `` Dark Matter '' is the single most interesting problem in contemporary theoretical physics , and its study involves the amalgamation of information from different disciplines , such as particle physics , astronomy , and cosmology .
The present project aims to constrain the properties of this elusive dark matter by looking at `` bias '' , the difference between the statistical properties of visible and dark matter.According to current theories of structure formation , small initial fluctuations in the early Universe grew under the influence of gravity until the large-scale structures which , we see at the present day , formed .
It appears that galaxies formed where the underlying dark matter concentrated in clumps ( called halos ) .
Thus , the present distribution of galaxies depends both on the distribution of dark matter and on the efficiency with which dark matter halos turn into galaxies .
Novel statistical measures developed by Dr. Szapudi and his collaborators will be used to characterize the present-day distribution of galaxies using data from on-going wide field surveys ( e.g. , the Sloan Digital Sky Survey ) which encompass up to a million objects .
Then the theory of bias will be applied to these measured distributions to constrain the distribution of the underlying dark matter .
This distribution , in turn can be used to test predictions from the various phenomenological and fundamental theories which have been developed to describe the Dark Matter .
*** AST-0206029PI RobinsonThe Soft X-Ray Transients are short-period , X-ray binary stars in which a compact star - either a neutron star or a black hole - is stripping matter from a relatively-normal companion star .
The stripped matter spirals down to the compact star , releasing gravitational potential energy and forming a hot accretion disk .
It is this superheated accretion disk that is the source of the X-ray emission .
Such bursts of X-ray emission may last a few months and can reach extraordinary luminosities , 100,000 times the sun 's luminosity .
The bursts are caused by an increase in the flow of mass through the disk .
The X-ray luminosity between outbursts is low , so the quiescent binary system is undistorted by strong X-ray irradiation , allowing reliable measurements of system properties .
The high proportion of black holes among the short-period X-ray binaries , their variable accretion flows , and their low X-ray luminosity between outbursts make them superb laboratories for studying black holes and black hole accretion .
Although they are generally discovered at X-raywavelengths , disentangling their properties requires observations at optical as well as X-ray wavelengths .
The known binaries are , however , all faint at optical wavelengths during quiescence and , thus , have been slow to yield their secrets .
This project will measure the dynamical masses of the x-ray binary black holes , measure the structure and evolution of the accretion disk and other accretion flows by Doppler Tomography of the emission lines , and will take advantage of the queue-scheduled operating mode of the 8-meter Hobby-Eberly Telescope of McDonald Observatory to obtain synoptic measurements of the optical spectral energy distribution of any northern x-ray transient that goes into outburst , mapping their full outburst behavior for the first time .
AbstractPellmyr/SeagravesThis project will expand dissertation research on the circumstances leading to cheating in mutualistic interactions by testing explicit hypotheses on geographically structured coevolution and history .
The obligate pollination mutualism between yuccas and yucca moths is one of the classical examples of coevolution , and an excellent model system to explore mutualism reversal as it includes derived non-pollinating 'cheater ' moths .
Using this interaction , three specific predictions will be tested on how local adaptation drives variation in plant-moth interactions and coevolution .
The project will specifically focus on phylogeography and floral morphology of the host plant Yucca filamentosa .
Phylogeographic analysis based on AFLP data will be performed across the plant range , and the results used to test hypotheses that involve comparisons with existing data sets on floral trait variation and moth phylogeographic patterns .
This study will provide one of the first data sets to extract both the historical and adaptive components of a mutualism .
The legendary chiefdoms of Panama have loomed large in anthropological theories of political power within small-scale polities .
First recorded by sixteenth-century Spanish conquistadores , Panamanian chiefs were noted for their keen , entrepreneurial interest in the acquisition and trade of exotic imports , particularly finely crafted gold ornaments .
Despite pronounced anthropological interest in the early historical accounts of Spanish chroniclers , the physical on-the-ground reality of Panamanian chiefdoms , as well as their antiquity , has never been established-rendering this political form more apparent than real .
Proposed research will remedy this situation by conducting archaeological research at one of the historically documented chiefly seats of power-Parita or Antatara-in the lower La Villa valley on the Azuero Peninsula of Panama.This research builds on a long-term program of investigation sponsored by the Smithsonian Institution and directed by archaeologist , Richard Cooke .
Focusing on the hilltop site of Cerro Juan Diaz , Cooke has documented that the site was an important regional center from ca .
200 BC until the period immediately following the Spanish conquest .
Current data suggest , however , that the site 's function changed through time , from settlement , to ritual center , and then back to settlement .
What is not clear is the total size of Cerro Juan Diaz , its relationships with other Pre-Columbian settlements in La Villa valley , and whether or not it was a seat of power within the historically described Parita chiefdom.In order to expand our base of knowledge beyond the hilltop center , Ms Isaza will conduct an archaeological investigation of the lower La Villa valley that will be pursued in three stages ( 1 ) survey and surface collection , ( 2 ) remote sensing of subsurface deposits in selected areas , and ( 3 ) limited excavation .
Within the first stage of survey , topographic maps and commercial-grade aerial photographs will help to guide the survey and to select tracts of land where artifacts will be collected .
Archaeological sites , indicated by mounded architecture and the presence of artifacts ( primarily sherds , lithics , and worked shell ) will be mapped with a hand-held GPS receiver .
This phase of field research will yield data relevant to the relative dating of sites ( via ceramic style ) , the presence of site hierarchies ( a pattern of one or more large sites surrounded by many small villages ) , and the presence of locales of specialized production .
During the second phase , selected locales will be subjected to a resistivity and a magnetic survey using a GEOHM 3 Resistivity Meter and a Cecium-vapor Gradiometer .
These instruments have the potential to detect subsurface anomalies-such as fire hearths , structure walls , and burial pits-which will then be targeted for excavation during the third and final stage of the investigation .
Overall , these methods will permit the systematic documentation of the spatial distribution and temporal depth of archaeological remains in the lower La Villa valley .
Preliminary reconnaissance and identification of scattered polychrome ceramics , marine shell , and polished manos and metates ( grinding stones ) suggest that most sites in the valley were occupied between AD 300 and 1300 .
The observation of sites with dramatically different artifact inventories also suggests the possibility of specialized workshop locales for artisans working within the chiefly realm.This investigation will advance our knowledge of the deep history of Panama in two critical ways .
First , this study will establish the first footprint of a historically known Panamanian chiefdom by providing a body of physical evidence to complement Colonial chronicles .
Second , this investigation will provide seminal evidence with which to evaluate the antiquity of chiefdoms in Panama .
That is , if a site hierarchy similar in structure to contact-period settlement patterns can be established for much earlier periods , then it is likely that chiefly governance enjoyed great antiquity in the Central American isthmus .
On the other hand , if the distribution of earlier sites is one of dispersed small villages , then an earlier acephalous political organization is more likely .
Either way , this investigation will have a profound impact on both anthropological and political theories of the integration of small polities and on the cultural heritage of Panama .
This project is based on the theme that assessment is most useful when it is closest to instruction , in both form and time .
Summative assessments at the end of a program provide necessary feedback , but are often of limited value in guiding improved achievement .
Such assessment takes place several years after instruction in basic concepts and changes in instructors and instruction during the intervening time may make the feedback appear irrelevant .
In addition , faculty members are often distrustful of reports where the faculty members lack first hand knowledge of the assessment procedure .
To be most effective in improving design and conduct of actual courses , the instructors in the course should use the assessment tools themselves , preferably during the conduct of the course .
Because the main reason for STEM majors taking core engineering science courses is to prepare them for future courses , the most important aspect of assessment is the ability of students to transfer their learning to new contexts in later courses .
Assessment should not only serve the purpose of the instructor or the institution it should also aid the students in recognizing their own achievements and in guiding the students to improve their understanding .
The goal of this project is to design online assessment tools that can be easily integrated into core engineering science courses and that are capable of answering the following questions What specific material have the students learned in core engineering science courses in mathematics and physics ?
What understanding do the students have of the material they have learned ?
Is it just disconnected facts and procedures , a broad conceptual picture informed by careful understanding of the details , or something in between ?
If it is something in between , can we describe more exactly what understanding they have gained ?
How much ( and what type of ) knowledge do the students retain after specific classes have ended .
Can the students use the material they have learned in new situations in their professional courses ?
How consistently do they use the understanding developed in core engineering science courses when encountering these ideas in new contexts ?
In the best case , can we predict in advance whether students have gained the necessary understanding to successfully apply their knowledge in new contexts ? Early versions of the sought after assessment tools have been developed under an earlier grant Technology & Model- Based Conceptual Assessment Research on Students Applications of Models in Physics and Mathematics funded by the NSF ROLE program ( REC-0087788 ) .
Model Analysis is being used to develop and validate the tools .
These tools are providing great insight into student conceptual understanding and learning styles , and this project is expanding their use to more core classes , and extending the focus from basic research on student learning to assessment of learning and conceptual understanding .
The assessment tools we are developing are providing real-time feedback to both instructors and students , enabling both to adjust the teaching and learning process to improve student achievement in terms of conceptual understanding and the ability to transfer learning to new contexts .
AST 0206006QuataertBlack holes , a prediction of Einstein 's Theory of General Relativity , represent the ultimate victory of gravity over all other forces in the Universe ; so much mass is concentrated in such a small volume that nothing , not even light , can escape .
In the past decade , astronomers have provided convincing evidence that most galaxies in the Universe have a massive black hole at their center ; these are a million to a billion times more massive than our Sun .
Such black holes can be detected by several techniques , including the radiation produced by hot gas falling into the black hole .
In some cases this gas produces more light than all of the billions of stars in the host galaxy which harbors the black hole .
Most of the time , however , massive black holes produce surprisingly little radiation from accreting gas .
This research is aimed at understanding this impressive range in energy production .
Dr. Quataert and collaborators will carry out theoretical calculations of the properties of hot gas in the vicinity of a black hole , both analytically ( pencil and paper ) and using computer simulations .
They will focus on determining how much gas falls into a black hole and how much radiation this gas produces .
They will then compare these results to observations from facilities such as the Very Large Array ( VLA ) Radio Telescope and the Chandra X-ray Observatory .
*** The objective of the proposed 5-day international conference is to highlight the major trends in several areas of nonparametric statistics .
Among the areas included are smoothing methods , functional data analysis , data mining , nonparametric model building , nonparametric inference , resampling , spatial statistics , computation statistics , high dimensional data , dependent data , and censored data .
The application areas feature medical research , bioinformatics , analysis of microarray data , analysis of evolutionary data , cancer research , AIDS and HIV research .
To achieve this goal the members of the organizing committee were selected with the idea of having as complete a representation of the important trends in nonparametric statistics as possible .
Indeed the committee consists of some top people in the field .
More information can be found in http//www.psu.edu/~npconf/ .
By bringing together researchers from the USA and Europe , the conference is expected to facilitate the exchange of research ideas , promote collaboration and contribute to further development of the field .
New researchers have been encouraged to attend with preference being given to them-as well as members of the underrepresented groups-for support .
Six issues ( one volume ) of the Journal of Nonparametric Statistics have been made available to host papers that will be presented in the conference with the conference organizers serving as guest editors .
AST-0206278PI SeagerPlanets orbiting other stars are too faint to be observed directly with current technology , but it is possible to detect them indirectly by observing their parent stars .
Close to 80extrasolar planets are currently known , all of them detected via the radial velocity technique .
These extrasolar planets are not seen directly , and thus even their most basic physical characteristics , such as radius and actual mass , can not be measured .
This project will carry out a planet transit search , an alternative and complementary approach to the radial velocity technique .
The planet transit search method involves looking for the tiny drop in brightness of a star caused by a planet as it periodically passes directly in front of its parent star ( i.e .
transits ) .
While most stars with planets will not show transits , stars with planets in short-period ( ? 4 days ) orbits are most likely to show transits .
Considering the known population of short-period planets , approximately 1 in 10,000 stars will have a short-period planet that shows transits in 10 to 15 nights of observations .
Looking at 10,000 stars one-by-one is far too time-consuming to be feasible .
Instead the transit search method involves monitoring tens of thousands of stars simultaneously .
Specifically , the PI will search for a periodic 1 % drop in brightness every time the planet passes in front of the parent star .
A successful planet transit search will have a huge impact on the field of extrasolar planets because every planet detected will have a measured radius providing a constraint on evolutionary and atmosphere models for these planets .
Dr. Steven Vogel & Marney C. PrattColonies of bryozoans , widespread and abundant filter-feeding animals , encompass a great variety of shapes and sizes .
But , since colonies of most bryozoans can grow in any direction , still more diverse colony shapes should be possible .
That only a relatively small subset of the theoretically possible shapes occur suggests that certain shapes have significant advantages over others .
Since bryozoans are filter feeders , hydrodynamic factors ( particularly water velocity ) could determine bryozoan colony form by affecting their ability to capture food .
This study addresses the role of hydrodynamics by assessing how water velocity affects particle capture in the major colonial growth forms .
It has four principal elements ( 1 ) measurement of particle capture success for bryozoans with different colony growth forms over a range of flow velocities , ( 2 ) measurement of the effect of feeding structure location on feeding success , and the assessment of how that might influence colony shape , ( 3 ) the use of flow visualization to determine the effect of colony form on the water flow around and through colonies , and ( 4 ) measurement in the field of the abundance , growth , and survival of bryozoans living at different water velocities .
By delineating the web of relationships linking colony form , habitat hydrodynamics , and feeding success , this study should contribute to our understanding of how an abiotic factor such as hydrodynamics can influence the evolution of colony form .
Its findings should be applicable to many other kinds of colonial filter feeders , systems whose greater aggregate taxonomic differences cloud comparisons of analogous morphological diversity .
Not Available AST-0206035PI CordesWith a number of upgrades coming to the Arecibo Observatory telescope of the National Astronomy and Ionospheric Center in the next year , the Observatory is poised to carry out a large-scale deep survey for new pulsars .
Current estimates are that about 1000 new pulsars will be discovered .
The system will have high sensitivity to the fastest pulsars and to compact binaries with orbital periods less than a few hours and with every possible kind of companion including black holes .
There are implications for detailed modeling of the magnetic field and ionic distribution in our Galaxy , defining the Galaxy 's spiral arms , and gravitational wave studies of compact binaries .
This project will lay the groundwork for the survey through a survey design and pilot observations , developing data processing software , and investigating radio frequency interference mitigation techniques .
*** A grant has been awarded to Dr. Paul Chippindale and Mr. Ronald Bonett of the University of Texas at Arlington to examine phylogenetic relationships , genetic variation , and biogeographic and phylogeographic history of aquatic plethodontid salamanders of the Eurycea multiplicata/Typhlotriton spelaeus complex .
This group occurs only in the Interior Highlands of the south-central U.S. ( Ouachita Mountains and Ozark Plateau ) , an area with high faunal diversity and many endemic species .
Preliminary data indicate that the transforming surface-dwellers Eurycea m. multiplicata and E. m. griseogaster , the nontransforming species E. tynerensis , and the enigmatic cave-dweller Typhlotriton spelaeus share a recent common ancestor and have undergone a major radiation in the region .
Numerous undescribed species appear to be present .
Mitochondrial and nuclear DNA sequences , allozymes , and morphology will be used to reconstruct relationships , and the diverse life history strategies and morphologies in the group will be examined in a phylogenetic context .
In collaboration with the Joint Genome Institute , entire mitochondrial genomes will be sequenced for 19 members of the complex plus outgroups to further assess relationships and species diversity .
This work will provide an understanding of the factors that have shaped biodiversity and species distributions in the Interior Highlands , and likely will result in recognition of several new species .
Such an approach is fundamental for conservation of these salamanders and the sensitive stream and cave habitats in which they occur .
This research will involve tests of biogeographic hypotheses regarding geological and climatic events that have structured the complex , and will provide a framework within which to trace life-history and morphological change .
This represents one of the first applications of entire mitochondrial genome sequences to such problems , will have wide-ranging implications for studies of phylogeny and biodiversity , and will identify portions of the mitochondrial genome that are most informative at a variety of phylogenetic scales .
CHEMICAL DISCRIMINATION OF PREDATOR DIETS IN AMPHIBIANSDr .
Dale M. Madison Aaron M. SullivanEssentially all animals must be wary of predators , but usually must perform daily tasks such as obtaining food .
In many cases , animals measure the threat of a nearby predator , and take evasive action ( and cease foraging ) only when attack seems imminent .
Some animals use chemical information not only to detect local predators , but also to assess threat by determining the diet of the predator .
In this case , a diet consisting of other individuals of the same species would be most threatening and the most likely to evoke evasive action.Given the importance of predator-prey interactions in ecological communities , and the relative neglect of chemical defense mechanisms among terrestrial vertebrates , the proposed research focuses on chemical defense and assessment in an important prey-predator unit in the woodlands of northeastern USA , specifically that between a common salamander ( Plethodon cinereus ) and the predatory garter snake .
The researchers have documented diet-based threat assessment by the salamander , and in the proposed study , will examine the degree to which salamanders use the ecological familiarity or genetic relatedness of alternative prey in the snake 's diet to assess the threat imposed by the snake .
Ecological familiarity will be assessed by using chemical cues from alternate salamander prey species occupying a variety of different niches in the same general P. cinereus habitat .
Genetic relatedness will be examined by using cues from alternative prey of varying genetic relatedness to P. cinereus , ranging from individuals of the same subspecies to individuals of different species and higher taxonomic categories .
These studies should reveal how some animals are able to decipher subtle chemical information in their environment that is important to individual survival and interpreting community-wide interactions .
Proposal # 0206733PI Thomas ChouInstitution University of California at Los AngelesTitle Models of One-Dimensional TransportABSTRACTThe proposed research explores the mathematical and physical aspects of particle transport in one-dimensional channels .
Mean-field analysis of Asymmetric Exclusion Processes ( ASEP ) will be studied analytically and extended to include spatially varying pore-particle interactions and time-dependent behavior .
A three-state ASEP will also be developed for modeling proton conduction along water wires .
Mean-field and Monte Carlo simulations will be used to obtain steady-state proton currents as functions of both proton concentration and electric potential differences across the pore .
Finally , an analysis of interacting particle transport across periodically structured pores will be performed .
Analogies with commensurate-incommensurate phase transitions will be explored within Frenkel-Kontorowa type models .
Pore transport is a general process vital for separations and catalysis technologies , electrochemical applications , and cell function .
In the limit of small , molecular-sized pores connecting two particle reservoirs , the motions of the transported species can be restricted to one dimension .
One-dimensional pores are reasonable models for an enormous number of systems including ion channels in cells ( which mediate electrolyte balance ) and zeolites ( minerals that are used to separate hydrocarbon products and mediate chemical reactions ) .
Therefore , theoretical models that can predict the rate at which molecules enter and react within structured one-dimensional channels will aid in the design of molecularly tailored pores in both the industrial and biological settings .
Computational simulations will be used to validate the proposed theoretical models .
A grant has been awarded to Dr. Bryan Danforth and Mr. Karl Magnacca of Cornell University for the study of native bees in Hawaii .
The primitive , wasp-like bees in the genus Hylaeus are the only bees native to the Hawaiian Islands , and have a crucial role in perpetuating and regenerating native ecosystems by pollination of important trees and shrubs .
Despite their remarkable radiation from a single ancestor into over 60 species - there are only 48 Hylaeus in North America - almost nothing is known about them .
As a step toward a comprehensive understanding of the evolution of the bees in relation to their environment , the goal of this project is to reconstruct the relationships among species .
Several genes from different regions will be sequenced , and shared changes in the sequence used to define pairs and groups of species .
In this way , a tree will be built that reveals the process of diversification from the original colonist to the current fauna .
By mapping the islands occupied by each species onto the tree , the history of dispersal among islands can also be determined ; and because the islands are arrayed in a line from youngest to oldest , an estimate of the date of that first immigrant can be made .
Like many insect groups in Hawaii , the native bees are a vital part of the ecosystem that have largely been overlooked .
A quarter of the species have not been collected in eighty years or more ; others are threatened by habitat destruction and invasive plants ; the most abundant species at least through the 1930 's is now virtually extinct .
An understanding of evolutionary relationships is a basic building block in the study of biology , ecological significance , and conservation .
It allows information from studies of one species to be inferred about its close relatives , and opens the door to more direct questions with immediate impact , such as the history of interaction between the bees and their food plants .
AST-0206051Halpern , Jules P.The successful program of discovering and characterizing the optical afterglows ofgamma-ray bursts ( GRBs ) using the two telescopes of the MDM Observatory will be continued and expanded to take advantage of the increased event rate and prompt positions expected from the HETE-2 and Swift space missions , and to incorporate infrared photometry .
In the first year of this three-year program , target-of-opportunity observations will be continued based on approximately 6-8 bursts per year in the northern hemisphere that are located within hours by the BeppoSAX , RXTE , and/or HETE-2 satellites .
In the second and third years , beginning with the year 2003 launch of Swift , the expected localization rate will increase to the point at which it will become feasible to schedule specific , coordinated observing programs on both telescopes .
It will become possible for this team to make optical identifications within minutes of a GRB event , which affords the opportunity to obtain multicolor optical light curves on the MDM 1.3m telescope , and either infrared light curves or time-dependent absorption-line studies on the MDM 2.4m .
The investigators will be able to respond in a prompt , coordinated way to about a dozen such localizations per year .
These data will be used to study the temporal decay and spectral evolution of GRB afterglows in order to diagnose the energetics of the fireball , and to diagnose the circumstellar environments in which these explosions occur , e.g. , uniform ISM , stellar wind , or superbubble .
*** The Educational Broadcasting Corporation ( WNET , New York ) is producing 14 half-hour episodes of Cyberchase , with accompanying outreach , to extend the new animated television series into a second season .
Cyberchase , which began airing on PBS in January , 2002 , engages children ages eight to eleven years old in the fun and challenge of mathematics .
Its goal is to demonstrate the usefulness of mathematics and empower children to become mathematical problem-solvers by fostering a positive attitude toward mathematics , reinforcing basic mathematics concepts , modeling reasoning skills and motivating children to approach mathematics with confidence .
The funds will also support the design and implementation of an outreach program , including materials for parents ; a workshop activity kit for schools , libraries and museums ; and ten pilot after-school programs .
Specifically , outreach components includeA web component that provides mathematical activities and content for the target audience and their parents ; A 12-page Cyberchase Magazine ( 50,000 copies ) ; A 20-page Teacher 's Guide ( 15,000 copies ) ; Collector Cards ( 50,000 sets of six cards each ) ; and aPosterPeer review , extensive evaluation and a national advisory board will inform all components .
0206951RebarberThis project will focus on developing techniques for sampled-data feedback for infinite dimensional systems .
A discrete time controller can operator with only limited frequency response , and infinite dimensional systems often have high frequency effects which can not be ignored , so there is not only interest in what can be done with sampled-data control design , but also in its limitations .
The following question is basic can a given continuous-time controller be replaced by a related sampled-data controller , while maintaining the desired response of the closed-loop system ?
Both idealized and generalized sample-and-hold will be considered .
Generalized hold can be used as a design parameter , and generalized sampling can be used when the output is not sufficiently smooth to accommodate point evaluations in time .
The PI will characterize as completely as possible those continuous-time feedback systems which do not lose their closed-loop stability when a sampled data scheme ( with sufficiently small sampling time ) is applied to the feedback , and will determine whether the performance of the sampled-data system can approximate the continuous time performance .
The performance measures considered are closed-loop growth rate and stability radius .
Tracking techniques for infinite dimensional systems will also be studied and developed .
Suppose a system has an external disturbance term which is to be rejected , or an external reference term to be tracked .
One common approach to doing this is by a low-gain controller suggested by the internal model principle .
The effectiveness of such a controller for a wide class of systems will be studied , as well as its sensitivity to frequency variations in the external signal .
Sampled-data versions of tracking controllers will also be considered .
These sampled-data and tracking results will be applied to PDEs in more than one space variable , especially coupled PDE models with at least one hyperbolic component .
Due to the fact that these models involve two different of PDEs , coupled via highly unbounded operators , the analysis has features which are distinct from the analysis for uncoupled systems .
For this problem a central concern for output feedback design is the analysis of the input-output map , i.e .
the map from the control to the observation.Advances in digital technology have led to an emphasis on sampled-data design in control engineering , but the development of sampled data control for infinite-dimensional systems such as PDEs has been limited .
In many applications output data is available in discrete time rather than continuous time , and a feedback controller for such a system should be designed to take discrete data as its input , but act in continuous time .
Since there is already an enormous literature on continuous time stabilization of PDEs , the project will involve the investigation of how to modify continuous time controllers to obtain sampled data controllers , while maintaining system performance .
Also of interest are techniques for designing effective sampled-data controllers without reference to continuous time design .
Another topic to be considered is the design of active feedback control tracking external signals and rejecting noise .
As an application , these methods will be used to design a controller to reject noise in a PDE model which describes the interaction between sound waves in a cavity ( for instance , an airplane cockpit ) and the motion of a flexible wall of the cavity .
Suppose that there is an external noise source , such as engine noise , which is to be rejected , and active feedback control is to be applied to smart material actuators on the cavity walls .
Then a properly designed low-gain controller ( either continuous time feedback or sampled-data ) will attenuate the sound pressure at and near finitely many points of the cavity .
0206207ColeThis Americas Program award will provide support for a cooperative research project between Drs .
Ronald A. Cole and Bryan Pellom , University of Colorado , and Dr. Nestor B. Yoma at the University of Chile , in Santiago , Chile .
Co-support is provided by the Digital Government Program and the NSF-CNPq Collaborative Research Opportunities Program.The goal of their project is to provide a foundation for collaborative research and development of advanced dialogue systems in the U.S. and Chile , resulting in the deployment of working systems as test beds for research .
Advanced dialogue systems are human computer interfaces that support natural , unconstrained conversational interaction in specific task domains .
Researchers from both sides will collaborate on topics such as dialogue engineering , large vocabulary continuous speech recognition systems and text-to-speech engines .
The main idea is to set up the Colorado University Communicator system as test bed at LPTV for advanced joint research .
This will be the basis for research that will enable people in the Americas to access online information over telephone networks , and will thus provide real data from real users to evaluate system components .
Advanced dialogue systems will be developed and deployed in Santiago enabling access to useful information via telephones and cellular phones .
One of the primary goals of evolutionary research is to explain the mechanisms by which new species originate .
One such mechanism that has received relatively little attention is the formation of new species due to interbreeding between previously established species ( or , speciation via interspecific hybridization ) .
In an effort to understand how new species originate due to hybridization , this project will trace the history of divergence between Heliconius pachinus , a tropical butterfly species that recently originated via hybridization , and one of its parental species , H. cydno .
It is hypothesized that since the origin of the H. pachinus form , natural selection has led to the evolution of mechanisms by which species integrity is maintained .
This project will determine how much overall genetic exchange is occurring between these two species by examining these mechanisms and by comparing the genetic makeup of both species throughout their range.Although the role of hybridization in animal evolution is receiving more attention than ever , there are few clear examples of speciation via hybridization in animals .
Once finished , this study will provide one of the most complete explanations of speciation via hybridization .
Furthermore , the mechanism of divergence proposed here is a novel and exciting process by which speciation may have occurred many times in this genus and others .
The incredible correspondence of mimetic Heliconius species pairs has long amazed biologists and still lacks a mechanistic explanation .
The hypothesis put forward here could well be the explanation for this entire phenomenon .
PROPOSAL NO AST 0206067PI Sargent , W L WThe past few years have witnessed remarkable progress in understanding the origin and properties of the intergalactic medium , which gives rise to the absorption features known as the ''Lyman alpha forest '' in the spectra of distant quasars .
Comparison of the results of high resolution spectroscopy with hydrodynamic cosmological simulations of the high redshift ( z ~ 3 ) universe have shown that the Lyman alpha forest is the observational signature of an extended ionized gas arranged in the shape of filaments and sheets , the ''Cosmic web '' , from which galaxies condense .
This main reservoir of baryons has properties which can be characterized by gas dynamics ( temperature , pressure , ionization state ) on a small scale ; on larger scales the gas follows the distribution and peculiar motions of the dark matter which dominates the mass content of the universe .
Observations of Lyman alpha absorption probe the ionization history and baryon density of the universe as well as the variations in the dark matter distribution which leads to the formation of structure in the universe .
The funded work will continue and extend observations and analyses in a program of quasar absorption line studies and a program to detect emission from the Lyman alpha forest clouds using the HIRES and LRIS instruments on the Keck Telescopes .
PROXIMATE CAUSES AND ADAPTIVE SIGNIFICANCE OF INDIVIDUAL VARIATION IN THE BEHAVIOR OF KANGAROO RATSDr .
Stephen H. JenkinsAmy M. BarberComparative studies of closely related species or different populations of the same species have contributed greatly to our understanding of the evolutionary significance of various kinds of behavior .
More recently , researchers have begun to focus on variation among individuals in the same population , especially individuals belonging to the same age and sex class .
Study of this kind of variation holds as much promise for advancing understanding of the evolution of behavior in the future as study of interspecific variation and geographic variation within species has contributed to such understanding in the past .
There are several recent reports of intraspecific variation in diverse behavioral traits .
Some of this variation is organized into syndromes that are correlated with differences in hormone levels ; these syndromes have been described as different strategies that may be important for how individuals interact with one another or their environment .
However , most of this work has been done in the laboratory and so is unable to address how these different behaviors function under natural conditions.This study of Merriam 's kangaroo rats ( Dipodomys merriami ) builds upon the current evidence by using an experimental approach in the field .
Corticosterone is a major stress hormone in kangaroo rats and other animals and is an important basis , or proximate mechanism , for a variety of behaviors .
Levels of corticosterone will be altered within the natural range for kangaroo rats using hormone implants of corticosterone to increase levels and metyrapone implants to decrease the natural production of corticosterone .
These manipulations will be used to examine how individual differences in behavior change in response to changes in hormone levels .
A newly developed technique for sampling hormones in the feces of rodents will be used to non-invasively measure differences in hormone profiles among individuals .
The foraging behavior , spatial memory ability , and response of focal individuals to novel situations will be measured to quantify behavioral differences both before and after manipulation of hormone levels .
In addition , the consistency of behavior will be characterized for focal animals .
Modification of typical laboratory methods for use in the field will allow focal animals to remain in their natural habitat for a longer-term study ; most importantly , the survival of individuals will be monitored in relation to their corticosterone levels and behavior over the course of the study .
Survival is one key measure of the adaptive significance of behavior for kangaroo rats.This study , using a population of kangaroo rats in the field as a model system , provides a unique opportunity to understand in detail how individual variation in hormones influences the survival of individuals through its effects on a suite of interrelated behaviors .
The study will also provide both graduate and undergraduate training .
AST-0206346Sneden , ChristopherDr .
Sneden is awarded funds at the University of Texas at Austin to work with collaborators at Ohio State University and Michigan State University .
This team will lay the groundwork for a more detailed understanding of how our Milky Way galaxy formed and evolved .
Models of galaxy formation and evolution depend on understanding the motions and chemical enrichment of local main-sequence stars that are far lower in heavy elements than ordinary stars , and how these stars compare to globular cluster stars .
The known sample of these subdwarfs is very small.Dr .
Sneden and collaborators will study a new sample of these subdwarf stars in theGalaxy 's halo and thick disk ; this sample represents a huge increase over the number of subdwarfs previously studied .
The investigators will obtain accurate and self-consistent measures of temperature , reddening , and composition for a critically selected sample of approximately 150 subdwarfs identified in recent surveys for metal-poor stars .
They will also apply theoretical models to explore the dependence of the main-sequence luminosity on detailed stellar chemical composition .
The results will be used to improve the temperature and abundance scales of globular cluster main sequences for comparison to spectroscopic determinations on the giant branch , and to thus determine the relative ages and distances of globular clusters .
AST-0206149PI ElitzurThis project will continue a broad , ongoing program of theoretical studies of astronomical masers .
Recent maser interferometric observations reveal in unprecedented detail the structure of various astronomical environments .
Seizing the opportunities created by this progress , the topics targeted for research include ( 1 ) protostellar disks and outflows in high-mass star formation , as probed by water , SiO and methanol masers ; ( 2 ) the circumstellar shells of evolved stars , traced by a variety of maser and thermalspecies ; ( 3 ) the x-ray and shock impact of supernova remnants on their environment , deduced from OH masers ; and ( 4 ) structure at the parsec and sub-parsec scales at the centers of starburst galaxies and active galactic nuclei as revealed by their OH and H2O mega-maser emission .
In each case , a major ingredient of the theoretical research is the close collaboration with the teams conducting pertinent observations .
*** 0206861 Gurol This research is proposed to consider ozone technology as an alternative to combat bioterrorism through decontamination of enclosed spaces .
As a Small Grant for Exploratory Research , the inactivation rate of simulants of anthrax spores exposed to gaseous ozone will be investigated under various possible scenarios .
The results will enable the industry to ready the technology within a short period of time for full-scale applications .
*** AST 0206359PI LinThere are direct and practical reasons for studying the Sun owing to its obvious relationship to climate and for the effects of solar activity on earth , such as the interruption of radio communications when we are bathed in particles from solar flares .
Solar magnetism is key to understanding both global and local phenomena in the atmospheric layers of the Sun .
This project will develop new infrared instrumentation capable of high spatial , temporal , and spectral resolution of solar magnetic features from the photosphere to the corona .
At the solar surface they will study the generation and maintenance mechanisms for sunspots and small scale photospheric magnetic fields .
In the atmosphere of the Sun , they will investigate coronal magnetic fields , filaments , and solar prominences .
The observations will be used to construct magnetic field models for the photospheric features from which comparisons with theory may be made .
In addition , an education and public outreach program , particularly to be used by science teachers , will be carried out to raise public awareness of solar research in Hawaii .
*** The Francis College of Engineering at the University of Massachusetts , Lowell , will provide 126 middle school students with a series of challenging learning opportunities at an after school DESIGNCAMP program .
The students , particularly females , will be recruited from Lowell and Lawrence communities with large Hispanic and Southeast Asian populations .
Three DESIGNCAMP modules will be used during the summer term and the following two trimesters at an after school program where students participate for two hours once a week .
The three DESIGNCAMP modules are Electrical and Mechanical Gizmos , Flight School , and Building a Better Contraption .
The activities in these modules will immerse the students in inquiry , design-based , and hands-on problem-solving environments .
The Francis College of Engineering offers the facilities for instruction and the access and use of engineering tools , equipment and technology as integral to the learning experience .
Parents will be organized into a Parents ' Council to provide continued support of students at home and to serve as an advisory body to the project .
The project will utilize the existing partnership among U Mass Lowell College of Engineering , school districts , and business and industries .
The results of this three-year project will be disseminated nationally through publications of youth and community-based organizations and presentations at science and engineering education conferences .
Phenotypic plasticity , the ability to adjust morphological traits in response to the environment , may enhance survival and reproduction in changing environments .
Given this adaptive value of phenotypic plasticity , it is important to understand the mechanisms that may maintain genetic variation for plasticity .
Despite the important theoretical role the cost of plasticity plays in maintaining this variation , relatively few empirical studies have focused on the role of cost of plasticity under natural conditions .
This dissertation research will address this issue by examining the balance between the cost of plasticity and the benefit of plasticity under a variety of environmental conditions .
Populations of the herbaceous plant Geranium carolinianum from both environmentally variable and uniform light environments are compared for the patterns of plasticity to natural variation in light availability .
The genetic basis of plasticity will be assessed because the potential of phenotypic plasticity to evolve in response to future environmental change depends in part on its genetic basis .
Finally , a field study will examine how selection may favor plasticity under environmentally variable conditions but favor non-plastic responses under uniform conditions .
An increase in environmental variation is expected with global climate change .
Understanding how plasticity is maintained is central to predicting population response to diverse environments .
AST 0206038ToumaOver the last decade , thanks to high-resolution observations of galactic nuclei by the Hubble Space Telescope ( HST ) , supermassive black holes ( SBHs ) have been detected in two dozen or so galaxies ( including the Milky Way ) .
These detections rely on the measurement of the appreciable dynamical effects that a black hole exerts on nearby gas and stars .
Dr. Touma will conduct a detailed study of stellar dynamics around SBHs in galactic nuclei .
This study will bolster detection efforts through careful dynamical modeling of kinematic observations .
It will also help to clarify the role that a SBHs play in shaping features found in the central regions of the host galaxy .
Finally , it will shed some light on questions relating to the origin and evolution of SBHs .
In particular , it will involve a thorough analysis of a violent instability that Dr. Touma has recently identified .
This instability affects stellar disks which are dominated by a SBH in their center , and which harbor a small proportion of counter-rotating stars .
The instability distorts the disk into a lopsided shape and promises to explain the lopsided nucleus of the Andromeda Galaxy ( M31 ) , which harbors an SBH , and is suspected of supporting a small percentage of counter-rotating stars .
*** This grant provides partial support for an annual , two-week workshop held in Kansas City , Missouri , which introduces precollege teachers to fundamentals of weather observing , analysis , and forecasting , and equips them with modern instructional material for use in their own courses and in peer-training sessions at their home institutions .
These workshops have been held for the past decade by the American Meteorological Society in collaboration with the National Weather Service .
Typically , about 25 teachers participate , drawn from all parts of the United States .
The objective is to improve the effectiveness of teachers in generating interest and understanding of science , technology , and mathematics among precollege students .
The program is designed to promote working relations between teachers and scientists and to encourage the use in K-12 classrooms of recent research findings and the Web-delivered world meteorological data stream .
This award supports the program for the five-year period beginning in 2002 .
AST 0206216KravtsovOne of the greatest challenges of modern astrophysics is understanding how galaxies such as our own Milky Way form within the framework of the Big Bang cosmology .
The current theory of structure formation ( called the Cold Dark Matter ( CDM ) scenario ) predicts that massive galaxies were built from smaller galaxies that collided and merged , inducing bursts of star formation and resulting in the different types of galaxies observed today .
This entire sequence of events is thought to be seeded by quantum fluctuations in the very early Universe and governed by mysterious dark matter which constitutes about 85 % of all matter in the universe .
While the CDM theory is successful in explaining many observations , it faces an increasing number of problems which may lead us to revise or even abandon this paradigm.One of the fundamental , unanswered questions is whether realistic galaxies with properties similar to those of observed galaxies can be formed in the CDM model .
This project will specifically focus on stellar feedback and heavy element enrichment and their role in the evolution of galaxies .
Dr. Kravtsov and his collaborators will address this question by using very high-resolution , state-of-the-art computer simulations which include all the main processes thought to be important in galaxy .
In particular , the simulations will account for the release of enormous amounts of energy and heavy elements into the surrounding gas by the explosions of young , massive stars .
This energy release , or feedback , is thought to play a critical role in controlling the rate at which interstellar gas is turned into stars and in shaping the overall properties of galaxies .
*** Habitat loss and conversion are major contributors to biodiversity loss .
This dissertation research project addresses how land use conversions may contribute to morphological changes in butterflies , ultimately changing dispersal capabilities and influencing evolutionary pathways .
The objectives of the project are 1 ) To evaluate the effectiveness of dispersal proxies for butterflies ; 2 ) To determine the effects of urban growth patterns and habitat fragmentation on butterfly dispersal ; and 3 ) To evaluate whether dispersal morphology in selected California butterfly species has changed in response to landscape changes.Butterflies exhibit a range of dispersal behavior from sedentary to mobile .
These behavior differences contribute to a species ' success in spatially structured populations .
Within a population there also exists a range of dispersal capabilities that are influenced by selective pressures from the environment .
Thus , changes in the distribution of habitat can alter dispersal capability through selection , ultimately reflected in morphology .
This project will use an urban growth model to analyze different landscape patterns using measures of connectivity for different disperser types .
Museum specimens will be used to investigate morphological changes over time in six butterfly species .
The results of this research will enhance our understanding of how land use changes and landscape patterns influence population processes that may lead to evolutionary changes or species extinctions .
Large columnar cacti , such as the saguaro ( Carnegiea gigantea ) , are prominent features of many ecosystems .
Because of their extensive distribution and abundant production of large succulent fruit they play an important role in structuring food webs and ecosystems .
This research assesses the importance of the saguaro 's fruit as a food and water resource to a desert bird community in the Sonoran Desert of Arizona and Mexico .
Naturally occurring carbon and hydrogen stable isotope signatures of the saguaro 's fruit are used to track the movement of nutrients and water from the plant into the bird community .
This project will provide new insight the role of cacti as consumer resources in arid and semi-arid ecosystems and provide direct measurements of frugivory and nutrient transfer rates between the saguaro and animals that consume its fruits .
Children can develop a wealth of knowledge about science and technology from theireveryday experience .
When visiting museums , watching educational TV , surfing the Web , or reading science-oriented books , children are actively developing proto-scientific reasoning skills , nascent theories for scientific domains , knowledge of interesting sciencefacts , knowledge about famous scientific narratives , and early ideas about what differentkinds of scientists do in their professional work .
When children encounter science instruction in elementary and middle school , when they dream about what they might do when they grow up , and when they make choices about the courses they want to take in high school and beyond , those with experience and interest practicing scientific andtechnical thinking are more likely to seek it out and to succeed.Virtually all children and their parents come equipped with the tools needed to cultivateearly math or scientific literacy , but these conversations and activities need to start from a seed a simple observation , an unexpected outcome , a question .
For families with high levels of scientific literacy and interest , these seeds can be sown from personalexperience .
Indeed , more than three quarters of scientists in a recent NationalScience Foundation survey reported developing their passion for science in early , out-of-school activities such as nature walks with their parents , family visits to museums , or taking apart radios or launching rockets at home .
We have no doubt thatmuseum-based and media-based informal science infrastructure will have a positive effect on scientific literacy and science achievement , but the biggest effects will be forthose who already are most likely to enter the educational and professional pipe-line for science and technology -- the children of families that go to museums , watch educational programming , and visit educational web sites.Interestingly , boys more than girls are most likely to reap these benefits within highlymotivated families .
There is evidence to suggest that parents are less likely to bring their daughters to science museums than their sons , and that even among museum-goingfamilies , parents were more than three times more likely to explain the science of an exhibit to boys than to girls ( true even when the boys and girls were as young asone to three-years old ) .
What of families who may not be as comfortable with or as interested in pursuing science ?
These parents , already less likely to visit science museums for familyrecreation , may also not be aware of how many teachable moments exist in everyday life to prompt conversations with their children about math , science and technology , andespecially so if they 're parents of girls.Building on a successful pilot project we propose to seed the development of scientificand technical literacy by developing , placing , and maintaining engaging gender-sensitivescience-oriented signage in the places where the broadest cross-section of Pittsburgh 's children and families gather .
We call these signs explanatoids .
While science museums and science-oriented media are important forces for informal science education , childrenand their families must seek them out over other forms of leisure activity .
In contrast , our explanatoids bring science to the people , in a way that includes girls fully in that outreach.We are asking for support for three years to develop our pilot work into a full-scaleregional project that can be replicated elsewhere as a gender-sensitive model forenhancing math/science literacy within a community .
The project will include thedevelopment and installation of gender-sensitive signage as well as the production of associated support materials for parents and teachers throughout the SouthwestPennsylvania region .
The project will leverage unique partnerships already built betweenFamily Communications , Inc. ( producers of Mister Rogers Neighborhood ) , local foundations , Carnegie Mellon University , the University of Pittsburgh 's Learning Research & Development Center , Kennywood Amusement Park , The Pittsburgh Teachers Institute , The Pittsburgh Children 's Museum , and The Pittsburgh Parks Conservancy .
Formative and summative evaluation will provide quantitative and qualitative measures of the waysthat the project ( 1 ) counters negative stereotypes about girls and women in math , science and technology ; ( 2 ) enhances girls ' interests and successful participation in those arenas in schooling and career aspirations ; and ( 3 ) advances the recognition thatmath , science and technology are integral to the regions future economic well-being .
The overall focus of this research is to apply scattering techniques to examine the phase behavior and kinetics of order-disorder and order-order phase transitions in multiblock copolymers in selective solvents using small angle neutron scattering ( SANS ) , small angle x-ray scattering ( SAXS ) , atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) , and computer simulation methods .
A major focus of this research will be to use synchrotron based time-resolved SAXS to follow the time evolution of structural features , and relate them to theoretical models of nucleation and growth kinetics of disorder-order transitions and of transitions between different ordered states .
We will also initiate preliminary studies using AFM imaging to characterize the surface morphology of films of these micro-phase separated materials .
The proposed research will provide detailed insight into the kinetics of the phase separation mechanisms involved in these different transitions , as well as in the mechanisms involved in the growth of micelles themselves .
An understanding of the phase behavior of multiblock copolymer solutions and gels is important to their numerous applications in materials science and technology .
An exciting potential application is to use them as templates for nanolithography of solid state devices .
The proposed AFM and SAXS studies of block copolymer films have direct relevance to the potential application of these films in nanolithography .
The research will also lead to advances in designing and building specialized components for use at beam line facilities and data analysis programs with a wide range of applicability .
The proposed studies will lead to the Ph .
D dissertations of two graduate students ( including one female American student ) and provide research opportunities for undergraduates .
The project also involves international collaboration with scientists in Czech Republic .
Abiotic stress in the form of drought , salinity , and cold has a major impact on grape production and quality .
Several studies have shown that water-deficit-stressed grapevines produce superior quality wine .
The molecular genetic and biochemical basis for this correlation remains poorly understood .
An integrative and quantitative analysis of mRNA , protein , and metabolite changes following abiotic stress imposition is required to enhance production efficiency under stress conditions and to understand the plant-derived contribution to constituents of wine quality .
It will also require the customization and application of comprehensive bioinformatics systems to track and analyze changes that arise in response to abiotic stress and potentially related aroma , flavor , and color characteristics of grape juice and wine .
One long-term goal of our research is to develop comprehensive genomic tools to facilitate the genetic engineering of improved abiotic stress tolerance traits in V. vinifera .
The specific objectives for accomplishing this goal include 1 ) extensive gene discovery through large-scale expressed sequence tag ( EST ) sequencing and mRNA expression profiling using oligonucleotide microarray-based expression monitoring in roots , leaves , and fruits of grapevines exposed to multiple abiotic stresses ; 2 ) global mRNA expression profile data will be complemented by protein expression analyses using state-of-the-art proteomics methodologies ; and 3 ) identification of specific metabolites and metabolite profiles in grapevines and fruit following abiotic stress that confer desirable aroma , flavor and color quality characteristics and improved health benefits .
Metabolite profiles from grape juice of well-watered and water-deficit-treated vines will be compared with quantitative data from mRNA and protein expression patterns using comprehensive bioinformatics systems to store and analyze data sets .
Ultimately , these data sets will be integrated into a reliable prediction model for wine characteristics .
The proposed research will greatly facilitate future gene discovery and enable improvements to be made in both production efficiency and wine quality under environmentally adverse growing conditions .
At the heart of the grant is a cutting stock problem - this is a classical problem familiar to most researchers in operations research and has applications in a number of continuous production applications including metals such as steel or aluminum , paper , textiles , fiber-optic and electrical cable , and glass , to name a few .
However , the version around which the proposed research is built is fundamentally different .
The grant address the case where a company has geographically distributed distribution points that it can stock with standard sizes from its plants , and the customer demand for smaller sizes comes from other geographically distributed points on a continuing basis .
Second , this demand is stochastic in nature .
Third , it addresses a sustainable manufacturing environment where the trim is not considered waste , but rather gets recycled and has an inherent value associated with it .
Fourth , the problem is not a static one where a one-time decision has to be made .
Rather , decisions need to be made on an ongoing basis , and decisions made at one point in time have a significant impact on decisions at later points in time .
The overall objective is to find long-run rates of replenishment for the standard sizes as well as long-run policies for cutting these into smaller pieces so as to satisfy customer demand .
The grant will extend this basic model to consider supply chain design problems and the analogous case for two-dimensional products.Supply chain problems are critical for most industries .
While there has been much research into optimizing supply chains , most research considers only a small part of the supply chain .
This grant is unique in that it provides optimal policies for the design and operations of a supply chain under uncertainty .
Since it addresses one-dimensional and two-dimensional products it will have applications to many industrial problems .
This research will study the interpersonal activity between trainer/trainee in a collaborative visual inspection Virtual Environment and will involve a new Collaborative Virtual Environment ( CVE ) capable of real-time capture and visualization of eye movements of one of the participants in the CVE .
Of particular importance is the recording and real-time depiction of visual deictic references made with the eyes by either instructor or student in the environment .
Deictic references are associated with pointing and verbal expressions ( such as look at this or see that ? ) .
Collection of explicit visual deictic references , as made by the eyes , will facilitate task-based analysis and modeling of visual attention during human-human interaction in Virtual and Physical Reality.The main objective of this project is to develop a new interactive 3D visual inspection system in Virtual Reality , based on an existing single-person virtual aircraft inspection environment .
To allow the measurement of visual deictic reference , it will extend the current single-person Virtual Environment ( VE ) to a Collaborative Virtual Environment ( CVE ) which will allow the simultaneous participation of two individuals .
The main technological innovations are extensions to available eye tracking techniques to allow real-time capture and visualization of eye movements of one of the participants during simultaneous participation in the CVE .
The fundamental exploration of visual deictic reference will be addressed during evaluation of visual inspection of the environment by the instructor ( expert ) and the trainee ( novice ) .Existing approaches have failed to yield significant improvements in inspection performance .
The successful completion of this research will provide a better understanding of the issues related to human-human interaction and training .
Results from this research are expected to advance our understanding of complex multi-party environments where gaze-based communication is employed .
The CVE will allow visualization and analysis of human attentional factors in shared-space environments .
The study of visual deictic reference will lead to novel insights into human learning and behavior , notably learned improvement of visual search strategies .
The research effort involves a multidisciplinary team of researchers with expertise in virtual reality systems , vision based research , human/machine systems design , inspection systems design , and training and computer supported collaborative work.Educational activities involving the curriculum and laboratory training will be closely integrated with the research , involving both undergraduate and graduate students .
Although primarily focused on aircraft inspection , the anticipated results have the potential to impact a wide range of tasks in the maintenance and service industries , such as inspection of products in a manufacturing environment , flight crew systems training and training of air traffic control personnel , real-time military target acquisition , process control monitoring , and baggage inspection ( aviation security ) .
An aggressive investigation is planned on the structure/nonlinear optical property relations of materials with special emphasis on several classes of organic compounds .
An excellent collaborative team of experts has been assembled in this area along with the best experimental facilities for nonlinear optical ( NLO ) materials characterization .
Along with the PI 's at CREOL including a chemist , collaborators include Seth Marder , Joseph Perry and Jean-Luc Bredas with Chemistry at the University of Arizona , Francois Diederich in Chemistry at ETH , Zurich , Olga Przhonska , Alex Kachkovski and co-workers at the Institute of Physics , National Academy of Sciences , Kiev , Ukraine , and Anthony Brennan at the University of Florida .
State-of-the-art laboratory facilities have been specifically designed and developed for the program outlined in this proposal .
Five laboratories are devoted to this investigation .
The latest addition is a femtosecond pump/continuum probe , nonlinear spectrophotometer .
This mimics the operation of a standard linear spectrophotometer and is the closest one can come to a facility that could be made into a commercial instrument for spectral analysis of NLO material properties .
Data are consistent with the two-photon fluorescence ( 2PF ) spectroscopy method , which takes considerably longer and requires fluorescent samples .
Thus , a broader range of materials can be studied .
These techniques , combined with the PIs ' previously-developed experimental Z-scan technique , along with complementary methods of single frequency pump-probe methods with femtosecond , picosecond , and nanosecond tunable optical parametric sources , provide a unique facility to carry out the goals of this proposed effort .
The ultimate goal of this study is to develop a predictive capability for the NLO properties in terms of the linear optical properties and/or molecular structure similar to what the PIs have accomplished for semiconductors .
The femtosecond continuum can range in wavelength from 300 nm to > 1.7 mm and can thus probe the NLA over this broad spectral range .
Thus , in a single experiment the changes in absorption at all frequencies from the IR to the UV are measured .
By temporally delaying the probe , the dynamics of this nondegenerate NLA are also obtained .
This allows easy separation of the ultrafast NLA process of two-photon absorption from cumulative nonlinearities such as excited state absorption .
With this instrument one can determine where are the strong two-photon absorption bands , and what is the excited-state absorption spectrum .
The answers to these and similar questions will give theoreticians the information necessary to test theories and practitioners to find and exploit new NLO materials .
This project will develop an online reference guide , called Pathfinder , primarily for non-technical audiences , including undergraduate and graduate students .
This guide will enable users to gain an overview of the power and energy field in pursuit of educational opportunities and resources .
Developed in conjunction with IEEE 's Virtual Community on Power and Energy , this tool will aggregate quality resources and provide an orderly process for discovery .
Recourses will include publications from the IEEE and other sources , as well as knowledge or learning objects found in online collections , including the NSF-funded DLNET collection .
These objects will include publications and other resources that define the field of power and energy , its attendant industries , and specialized technical and applications areas .
IEEE staff and volunteers from the IEEE Educational Activities will work with other volunteers from the IEEE Power Engineering Society and the IEEE Industry Application Society .
They will also work with staff from IEEE Press and Wiley to identify and possibly make available resources for the user community .
The IEEE Virtual Community on Power and Energy will provide the online platform for developing and reviewing this tool .
Abstract0217421YoudThe George E. Brown , Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation ( NEES ) is a project funded under the NSF Major Research Equipment and Facilities Construction appropriation .
This cooperative agreement , under NEES , establishes two permanently instrumented field sites for monitoring soil-foundation-structure interaction ( SFSI ) , ground motion , ground deformation , and pore-water pressure responses .
The field sites will be used to monitor responses generated by local and regional earthquakes and for active experiments with excitation by shakers such as those being constructed by other NEES projects at the University of California , Los Angeles ( NSF NEES award CMS-0086596 and the University of Texas , Austin ( NSF NEES award CMS-0086605 ) .
These two field sites are being developed by a team of investigators led by Brigham Young University ( BYU ) , in partnership with the University of California at Santa Barbara ( UCSB ) and the University of Southern California ( USC ) .
The sites will be connected to the NEES network system through a high performance network .
This equipment will be operational by September 30 , 2004 , and will be managed as a national shared-use NEES equipment site , with teleobservation and teleoperation capabilities , to provide new earthquake engineering research testing capabilities for geotechnical and SFSI testing through 2014 .
Shared-use access and training will be coordinated through the NEES Consortium .
This award is an outcome of the peer review of proposals submitted to program solicitation NSF 01-164 , NEES Earthquake Engineering Research Equipment , Phase 2 .
The NEES equipment will be located as permanently instrumented field arrays at two sites in Southern California the Garner Valley Downhole Array ( GVDA ) in Riverside County , east of Hemet , California , and the Salton Sea Wildlife Refuge Liquefaction Array ( WLA ) in Imperial County near Calipatria , California .
Both sites are located adjacent to major faults and have previous histories of recording ground motions and pore-water pressures .
The two sites are underlain by soft , liquefiable ground .
The instrumentation at GVDA will be upgraded and enhanced for real-time data transmission .
A reconfigurable , one-story structure will be constructed at that site and instrumented with sensors installed in the structure , foundation , and underlying soil .
A small shaker will be permanently mounted on the roof of the building ; larger shakers may be brought to the site and placed on the building or on a nearby pad to artificially excite the structure and underlying ground .
Instrumentation at WLA will be upgraded and greatly expanded to allow monitoring of three-dimensional ground motion and pore-water pressure responses .
Communications equipment capable of concurrent data transmission and teleobservation will allow rapid delivery of data to the NEES network and remote participation in experiments conducted at the sites .
There is need to further study SFSI in real structures under seismic input , but there are always complexities in real structures that can mask understanding of SFSI phenomena .
Study of ground failure is also complicated in urban or geologically complex settings .
Simple , well-characterized test sites like these two are needed to increase understanding of the physics behind SFSI , ground response , and ground failure during earthquakes .
This pair of NEES field sites will also provide an excellent test bed for new in-situ site characterization techniques and new sensor technologies .
The field sites will have an impact on undergraduate and graduate teaching programs in earthquake engineering , geotechnical engineering , and engineering seismology by allowing students to participate in the active experiments through teleparticipation as well as on-site workshops .
Data from both sites will be contributed to the NEES Data Repository and the Advanced National Seismic System ( ANSS ) .
The collected information will aid development and verification of simulation models for ground response , pore-water pressure generation , and dynamic SFSI .
Improved simulation of these fundamental earthquake engineering phenomena will lead to better , safer and more economical engineering design .
BYU , UCSB , and USC will integrate experimentation at these sites into their research program and curricula , provide training opportunities for outside researchers through on-site courses and web-based materials , and host visiting scholars .
This project is concerned with solving several classes of difficult combinatorial optimization problems using very large-scale neighborhood ( VLSN ) search algorithms .
The VLSN search algorithms are neighborhood search algorithms where the size of the neighborhood is very large , possibly exponential in terms of the input size parameters , and enumerating all neighbors and evaluating them is prohibitively expensive .
The research relies on the use of improvement graphs for searching large neighborhoods .
Improvement graphs allow optimizing over very large neighborhoods quickly .
This methodology has been used to solve some classic combinatorial optimization problems as well as scheduling problems that have arisen in airline and railroad industries .
For the problems that we have addressed , VLSN search algorithms , when implemented well , are robust and provide excellent solutions .
The research project addresses VLSN search algorithms for three problem classes .
The first problem class will be large-scale partitioning and constrained partitioning problems arising in clustering , data mining and timetabling .
The second problems class will be integer multicommodity flow problems arising in logistics and telecommunication .
Integer multicommodity flow problems are multicommodity flow problems where the flow of each commodity on any arc is required to be integer .
The third class of problems to be investigated will be optional flight generation problem arising at United Airlines .
The objective in the optional flight generation problem is to determine a set of good potential candidates for additional flight legs to be added to an airline schedule to improve overall profitability .
The research of the PIs on VLSN search algorithms is motivated by the need to develop effective and practical heuristic ( approximate ) solution procedures for large-scale and structurally complex combinatorial optimization problems .
The goal is to enhance the toolkit for heuristic search by developing new methodologies with broad applicability .
We anticipate we and others will successfully develop and apply VLSN search techniques to a wide range of important combinatorial problem including problems arising in logistics and transportation and substantial savings will accrue by the use of these methods .
This project investigates the public value of the research funded by social policy agencies of the US federal government .
Public value refers not the outputs of research ( in terms of papers , reports , patents , etc .
) , but the societal outcomes such research influences , according to the agencies ' missions and as measured by the broadest available social indicators .
Studying this research will broaden the scholarship of public R & D management beyond such traditional agencies as NIH and NSF , facilitating the comparative study of techniques including merit review and technology transfer .
Moreover , the study may illuminate mechanisms for producing public value from research and thus contribute to understanding the relationship between sponsored research and societal outcomes more broadly .
Examining the public value of social policy research means studying the societal outcomes of the research and the hypothesized causal links between mission-related research programs and these outcomes .
Sources for the articulation of goals and objectives include authorizing legislation , mission statements , and strategic plans .
Societal outcomes include available , systematic social indicators , as well as ad hoc indicators that policy makers and stakeholders have used in articulating the societal problem triggering the need for the research program .
The project will seek to learn how social policy agencies set priorities between current programs and investing in research , how they manage research for societal outcomes , how they transfer new knowledge and/or technologies from their sponsored research into the pursuit of their missions , how they anticipate the linkages between their research and societal outcomes , and what those outcomes may be .
The current funding is for planning purposes , to develop the necessary permissions to gather data , develop questions to be asked , and develop the research design , analysis and interpretation .
ABSTRACTOCE-0217902Twelve estuarine biogeochemists will be selected from the U.S. scientific community to participate in the 7th International Estuarine Biogeochemistry Symposium to be held in Grimstad , Norway in May , 2002 .
During this meeting , special emphasis will be placed on discussions regarding new results on the biogeochemistry of high and low latitude fjords .
In addition , the biogeochemistry of arctic , tropical , sub-tropical and temperate estuaries also will be addressed .
Thematically , the symposium will discuss issues such as interactions between organic matter and trace metals , redox boundaries , nutrient control on productivity , climate change effects , experimental design of mesocosms , modeling of sediment-water exchange and new sampling techniques .
Results from the symposium will be published most likely in a special edition of the journal Marine Chemistry .
The objective of this project is to develop a new normative design decision making methodology especially tailored to overcome cognitive biases associated with environmentally conscious design .
Specifically , decision analytic procedures will be developed to direct a cost-effective product development process .
A new technology being developed at the University of Illinois to capture and recover hazardous air pollutants from gas streams will be used as the test-bed .
It captures dilute hazardous air pollutants from air and converts them to a pure liquid for reuse in the manufacturing process that generated the pollutant .
Activated carbon fiber cloth is employed .
The primary benefit of this research will be a shortened development time resulting in a product that will be more successful in the marketplace .
The decision-based design methodology will be integrated into an industrially sponsored senior design course .
The research and educational infrastructure will be improved by establishing this interdisciplinary collaboration , and also by development of new interdisciplinary course materials for both undergraduate and graduate courses in two different departments ( General Engineering , and Civil and Environmental Engineering ) .
In addition , two Ph.D. students will be trained in this new research area .
The results of this interdisciplinary research will be broadly disseminated across both civil and mechanical engineering research communities .
Societal benefits also include a new technology that not only removes hazardous air pollutants , but also cost-effectively recovers them for reuse .
Aiming for Algebra is a project of Girlstart , a nonprofit organization in Austin , Texas .
Its goal is to prepare middle school girls for and support their completion of Algebra 1 in the eighth grade as a means of readying them for college preparatory math and science classes in high school that lead ultimately to completion of the college majors requiredfor SMET careers .
The primary objectives of the initial 36-month demonstration period include improving girls self confidence and academic self-esteem ; increasing girls'awareness of SMET careers and the high school and college coursework required to enter such careers ; enhancing girls knowledge of and ability to use algebra in their lives ; improving parents awareness of SMET careers for women ; and increasing parents'awareness of ways to encourage their daughters ' success in algebra andsubsequent math and science courses in high school and beyond.The proposed intervention methods to achieve these ends include participation in anintegrated continuum of activities as part of a ifgirls-only science math clublc over a three-year period , as well as involvement in a range of other community- and Internet-based math and science experiences with parents and other adults .
The intellectual merit of this project derives from its translation of a significant portion of the body of previous research on the best practices for addressing genderinequities in SMET careers and the disparity in the mathematics and science achievement of girls in the United States into a single , cohesive informal program approach .
Moreover , the project will employ a cohort design that will facilitate anunderstanding of what parts of the intervention model have the most impact on theintended outcomes .
A rigorous evaluation component and a strong dissemination plan further strengthen the likelihood that Aiming for Algebra will result in a better understanding of how specific programmatic activities affect girls mathematical skills and their attitudes about and aspirations for math and science careers.The straightforward , unwavering focus on the completion of Algebra 1 in the eighth grade is another featurethat makes this project meritorious .
By tying its success to a single , observable goaland directing all of its energies to achieve this one purpose , the project sets itselfup for rigorous comparison with other efforts with an identical goal .
Aiming for Algebra intends to make its methodologies so transparent and so well documented that future research and demonstration projects can be erected squarely on the intellectualcapital it creates and disseminates .
Insofar as its broader impacts , the project willcontribute to an improved understanding of the ways girls can be best prepared for taking and making good grades in Algebra 1 before they reach high school ; it willadvance understanding among teachers and teacher preparation programs of how girls ' expectations of their science and math performance in high school and beyond can be improved ; it will provide empirical evidence of ways that female members of groupsunderrepresented in SMET careers- including but notlimited to those who are ethnic and racial minorities , low-income , linguistic minorities , and differently abled- canbe included in informal programming designed to redress the inequity ; and , perhaps mostimportantly , the project will benefit society by improving the nation 's ability to identify and remedy long-standing social , economic and academic practices that havedisadvantaged its female population and created obstacles to their full and equal participation in scientific , mathematical , engineering and technological professions .
In light of the increasing role of knowledge work in the economy , a fundamental understanding of effective knowledge transfer has increasingly gained currency in both the academic and managerial communities .
Transferring knowledge across organizational boundaries allows individuals to benefit from the experiences of others and access a greater breadth of organizational , technological , and market know-how .
There is a considerable body of research documenting the beneficial effects of knowledge transfer for organizational performance .
Substantial progress has also been made on investigating the psychological processes underlying knowledge transfer .
However , our understanding is less well developed for how social networks influence knowledge transfer .
An integrative network-based theory of knowledge transfer has yet to emerge .
Developing such a perspective is important because it emphasizes the ongoing patterns of interaction through which knowledge spreads , considers the informal organizational influences on knowledge transfer , and broadens the focus of research beyond that of single individuals and dyads to larger collectivities.This research tests a network-based theory of effective knowledge transfer , framed as a search-transfer problem .
We argue that network patterns are important in solving both halves of the problem .
For search , we argue that people with interactions that cut across multiple areas of expertise are better positioned to see how ideas developing in one area can be combined with ideas developing in another area .
People solving the search problem can transfer knowledge using one of two strategies .
The individual can move knowledge from the source to the recipient acting as an intermediary .
Or the individual can facilitate the transfer of knowledge from the source to the recipient by bringing the two parties together .
We maintain that the most effective knowledge transfer mechanism is contingent upon qualities of the knowledge being transferred and the amount of knowledge overlap between the source and the recipient .
To test the predictions , the researchers will gather sociometric , human resource management , and performance data ( at various levels ) along with information about individuals ' areas of expertise .
Data will be gathered from both primary and archival data sources .
The setting for the study will be three member organizations of the Twin Cities Knowledge Management Forum ( TCKMF ) , a consortium with the mission to help its members implement knowledge management within their organizations by sharing best practices .
Members of the TCKMF include Fortune 500 and other leading corporations ( e.g. , Cargill , Medtronic , Oracle , 3M Company , Unisys ) located in the Twin Cities area .
Results of a pilot study completed with one member organization have been presented to the consortium and the attending companies agree that the initial findings are promising , the questions being addressed are worth further examination , and the study shows clear potential for broader impact .
0127522StrombergThis Americas Program award will fund an international workshop on robust statistical methods to be held at the Pacific Institute for the Mathematical Sciences and the Department of Statistics of the University of British Columbia in conjunction with the 2002 International Conference on Robust Statistics ( ICORS2002 ) .
The workshop , which is being organized on the US side by Dr. Arnold J. Stromberg of the University of Kentucky and on the Canadian side by Dr. Ruben Zamar of the University of British Colombia , will bring together researchers and students in computational robust statistics .
The Division of Mathematical Sciences is joining in the support of this workshop .
Robust statistics deals with the problem that many classical statistical procedures work well only for data that comes from a population that is normally distributed .
Robust statistical procedures , on the other hand , work well independently of the normality of the data or even when the data contains outliers .
The last 25 years have seen tremendous advancements in the theory of robust statistics , but many very useful procedures are not used in practice due to the fact that they are difficult to compute .
Improved computational methods for robust procedures would be beneficial in that current computational methods are only practical for small to moderate sized data sets .
Outliers are much more likely to appear in larger data sets and thus improvement in computational methods will allow robust techniques to be applied to much larger data sets .
The workshop will serve as a forum to develop and share knowledge on improved computational techniques that will allow more robust methods to be used in practice .
A web page on the ICORS2002 will be devoted to discussions related to the workshop and drafts of papers will be posted there .
An electronic mailing list will be used to notify participants of important developments .
0217789HoffmannDescription This award is for support of a joint research project between Dr. Peter Hoffmann , Department of Physics and Astronomy , Wayne State University , Detroit , Michigan and Dr. Ahmet Oral , Physics Department , Bilkent University , Ankara , Turkey .
They plan to study the development of a new high-resolution Atomic Force Microscopy ( AFM ) technique for biological imaging .
Commonly used AFM techniques face fundamental limits to further improvement .
These limitations are due to fundamental operating principles of common AFM techniques , which can not be changed by simple adjustments of parameters .
The PIs plan to design and build a prototype of an AFM technique that avoids these limitations and , in principle , should be able to provide non-contact atomic resolution imaging and direct quantitative point-by-point measurements of interactions in situ in liquids .
This AFM technique relies on a sub-resonance , ultra-small ( < 1A ) oscillation of the AFM cantilever .
This linearizes the measurement and makes data interpretation straightforward .
Scope This award will allow a US scientist to collaborate with a Turkish scientist in a research project of high scientific potential .
The nanomechanics of biomolecules and the direct imaging of biological structures are of great interest in biochemistry , bioengineering and medicine .
The two scientists were directly involved in the development of an ultra-high vacuum ( UHV ) and a preliminary liquid-based version of the above described AFM technique which proved to be successful in UHV and in liquid .
However , the liquid based AFM was very difficult to use and had some fundamental design issues , which will be addressed in this collaboration .
The ultimate goal would be the construction of a user-friendly new AFM technique based on a novel operational principle , and the imaging and measurement of actual biological structures .
The development of this instrument would enhance current work by the PI , at his university 's medical school , on the mechanical behavior of tissues and antibiotic action of native antibiotic agents on certain bacteria , since it would allow for much higher resolution imaging and quantitative measurements of nanomechanical properties .
Both investigators are junior scientists , and the project will also support two graduate students from each institution .
We will develop algorithms ( and supporting theory ) for optimizing the expected performance of a stochastic system with respect to discrete decision variables .
We assume that the stochastic system of interest is represented by a simulation model , and hence that the performance of this system can only be estimated with noise .
Our focus is on `` general-purpose '' optimization techniques that do not exploit particular problem structure , because we want our techniques to be suitable for inclusion in general-purpose simulation software .
The goal is to produce algorithms that have provable asymptotic performance , competitive finite-time performance , and valid statistical inference at termination .
The keys to our approach are ( 1 ) our algorithms will work within a global guidance framework that guarantees asymptotic convergence , while giving us wide latitude to be aggressive and adaptive ; ( 2 ) within this framework , we will embed aggressive local-improvement schemes ; ( 3 ) we will enhance the local-improvement schemes with highly efficient selection-error control to insure improvement even in the presence of estimation error ; and ( 4 ) we will provide valid statistical inference at algorithm termination so that the solution reported as best will be the best , or near best , of all those solutions actually visited by the search , with a prespecified confidence level.In the United States , computer simulation is widely used to design and improve ( optimize ) manufacturing , service , military , telecommunication and financial systems that are subject to uncertainty .
Our research will provide theoretically sound optimization algorithms that can be incorporated into new or existing simulation software packages .
There is a critical need for this research , because every day simulation users are formulating and attempting to solve optimization-via-simulation problems using commercial products that ignore , or only slightly notice , that the simulation experiment incorporates uncertainty .
These commercial products often work well , but they can also be dramatically misled , and the user has no indication of , or protection against , the incorrect and costly decisions that may result .
The availability of optimization tools in nearly all commercial simulation modeling packages implies that optimization-via-simulation problems will be solved .
The question is whether they will be solved efficiently with theoretically sound algorithms that provide specific guarantees of , and inference on , their performance .
The goal of our research is to develop such optimization-via-simulation algorithms , representing a substantial advance over the state of the art in both theory and practice .
Tennessee Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation ( TLSAMP ) If America is to prosper in the new millennium , we must build a domestic science , mathematics , engineering , and technology ( SMET ) workforce that uses the talent of allsegments of our population .
America 's prosperity is fueled by the nation 's technicalenterprise .
As evidenced by the tragic episode of September 11 , our country must buildon the diversity within this country so that an increasingly large share of the work forcewill consist of women and underrepresented minorities.Many national programs have been identified to enhance the quantity and quality ofunderrepresented minorities in science and engineering .
This proposal describes aprogram designed to improve the quantity and quality of underrepresented scientists andengineers graduating each year with a bachelor 's degree .
The partners in the proposedalliance are all from the state of Tennessee .
The existing knowledge base relative tominority participation in science and engineering will be the foundation of our efforts.The goal is to build on this foundation and to expand the available options to enrichprograms at partner institutions and beyond.Tennessee State University , LeMoyne-Owen College , Middle Tennessee StateUniversity , University of Memphis , University of Tennessee at Knoxville , and VanderbiltUniversity will partner to form the Tennessee Louis Stokes Alliance for MinorityParticipation ( TLSAMP ) .
The ultimate success of this collaboration rests in the fact thatif there is any student 's need , there is an institution within the alliance with thecharacteristics , experience , and/or resources to meet the needs of the student .
Thealliance can draw on the strengths and experiences of each of the individual members.The goal of the TLSAMP is to increase the number of the underrepresented SMETstudents by at least 75 % at the end of the five-year period .
The objectives to support thegoal of the alliance are 1 ) to recruit underrepresented students to pursue science orengineering as a career , 2 ) to improve the quality of the learning environment forunderrepresented science and engineering students at all schools , and 3 ) to ensure that alarger number of undergraduate students are prepared to enter graduate programs.The Alliance will emphasize collaborative learning approaches , mentoring activities viafaculty , staff , and upper level students , and hands-on research and internship experiences.Using this approach , three project areas have been chosen as critical focal points forachieving the qualitative and quantitative goals of the project .
These project areas utilizestrategies with demonstrable effectiveness in the retention of underrepresented students inscience and engineering .
All project areas will involve faculty , staff , or students duringthe design phase as well as the continuous quality improvement phase.In this project , assessment will be built into each project area as a result of theformulation of specific , measurable quantitative and qualitative objectives .
Theseobjectives will be reviewed and revised on an ongoing basis .
An Advisory Committeecomposed of the Vice Presidents and Deans from the six schools will oversee all aspectsof the grant project .
Kevin J. BurnsThe Evolution of Sexual Dimorphism in Plumage A Phylogenetic Perspective This study uses an evolutionary tree of a group of birds to investigate the evolution of differences between males and females in plumage .
Evolutionary trees of a variety of organisms are providing a new perspective to classical ideas about the evolution of plumage coloration .
For example , male ornaments can be lost frequently , and females often evolve elaborate traits .
In this study , DNA sequences of three genes will be used to reconstruct an evolutionary tree for species of tanagers and finches .
The resulting evolutionary tree will be used to examine patterns of evolution of sexual differences in plumage .
Transformations between different types of plumage will be tabulated and the frequency of changes in male plumage will be compared to the frequency of changes in female plumage .
In addition to providing information on the evolution of male and female plumage differences , the data resulting from this project will also address questions in a variety of areas including the biogeography of Central and South America , the prevalence of ultraviolet coloration in birds , the evolution of feeding characteristics , and evolutionary tree constructing methods .
Beyond scientific impacts of this proposal , this project will also provide training and educational opportunities for several students , at both the undergraduate and graduate level .
SDSU is a diverse campus , with no racial group making up a majority of the students .
It is expected that the students that work on this project will reflect the diversity seen on campus .
Results will be disseminated broadly within scientific journals , the popular media , and bird-watching literature .
Both the molecular sequence data and the plumage data will be made accessible online .
The teaching efforts of the principal investigator will also be enhanced by the results of this project by providing specific examples that can be included in lectures and inquiry-based activities .
Science on Patrol ( SOP ) , a demonstration project of the Institute for Schools of the Future and the Police Athletic League in collaboration with the Manhattan Robbery Squad , the Crime Scene Unit , the Arson and Explosion Squad and other units of the New York CityPolice Department Detective Division , selected New York City public schools , communityoutreach organizations , science professionals and database and Web designers , is designedto promote interest and achievement in science by providing youngsters compelling problems ( 'crimes ' ) they can solve by applying the scientific processes and skillsactually used by crime scene investigators to solve crimes .
This approach capitalizes on the interest in high profile crimes treated in the popular press , movies and currenttelevision programs .
The informal science project is aimed squarely at raising the level ofparticipation and achievement in science for adolescent females and other members of underrepresented minority groups by achieving thee goals1 .
using research-based strategies to attract and retain underrepresented minorities , particularly females , in informal science programs ; 2. increasing their interest and achievement in science knowledge and skills ; and3 .
raising their awareness and interest in science-based careers.This project will roll out through an existing structure , PAL centers in the Bronx in YearOne , in PAL centers throughout New York City in Year Two and in PAL centers across the country in Year Three .
Interdisciplinary teams comprising PAL center instructors , educators , police detectives , instructional designers , and scientists will work collaboratively to ( 1 ) develop , field test and revise a minimum of 12 crime scenariosfor the youngsters to solve ; ( 2 ) develop additional course materials , including aFacilitator 's Guide , the Science on Patrol website , a Student Activities Kits whichinclude case folders for each of the 'crimes ' , and a manual for mentors and/or volunteers ; ( 3 ) increase the participants ' capacity to apply science knowledge and processes to solve real world problems ; and , ( 4 ) build the capacity of faculty to implement compelling and challenging problems in environments that are gender-neutral , promote collaboration , encourage problem-solving and reflect both research and best practice for increasing participation and achievement in science-based areas.Decades of research on the root causes and outcomes of the under representation of females in mathematics , science and technology have amply demonstrated that the cultureand context of K-16 schooling clearly lies at the heart of the issue .
Yet the literatureshows the very factors that constrain participation and achievement of females and otherunderrepresented minorities in higher levels of mathematics and science are alterable.Science on Patrol is an innovative project that links science knowledge and skills with the real world applications of forensic specialists in a highly motivating course of studyfor middle and high school students .
The key element , however , is the comprehensive use of research-based findings to shape learning environments specifically designed to attract and retain females and other underrepresentedminorities to advanced study of science andscience-related careers .
Science on Patrol does not single out specific research-basedfactors that promote success for female and other underrepresented minorities.Instead , it integrates all in an integrated and coherent manner to create learning environments that are friendly to the target population .
Information about the cultureand context of these learning environments will be disseminated broadly and serve as a model for other informal science efforts and for school-based K-16 classrooms .
0217721TiltonThis award supports Robert Tilton and a student from Carnegie Mellon University in a collaboration with Per Claesson of the Department of Chemistry at the Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm , Sweden .
The project will focus on manipulation of the molecular-level structure of adsorbed polymer layers on solid surfaces .
The manipulation is achieved by introducing surfactants hat bind with varying affinities to different segments of the polymer as it adsorbs .
Particular attention will be paid to non-equilibrium configurations in the adsorbed layers and to the dynamics of their transformations .
The goal is to develop techniques to design long-lived metastable layer configurations that are optimized for technological applications .
The collaboration combines the distinct , but highly complementary , approaches taken by the Swedish and US groups the US side uses optical and spectroscopic methods to characterize composition and micro-environmental aspects of adsorbed layers and the Swedish side uses surface force measurement to characterize the structure and mechanics of the layers .
A key aspect of the collaboration is the initiation of a graduate student exchange between the US and Swedish groups .
This award provides support for the Seventh U.S. National Conference on Earthquake Engineering , 7NCEE by partially underwriting the administrative and development costs , and to make possible increased participation in the conference of graduate students in earthquake engineering disciplines.The Conference is the seventh in a series of national conferences on earthquake engineering .
Previous conferences have been held in Ann Arbor , Michigan ; Stanford , California ; Charleston , South Carolina ; Palm Springs , California ; Chicago , Illinois , and Seattle , Washington .
They are held every four years , midway in time between the dates of the quadrennial World Conferences on Earthquake Engineering .
Each of the national conferences has been sponsored by EERI , the Earthquake Engineering Research Institute , a non-profit professional society devoted to earthquake engineering and earthquake loss reduction.The 7NCEE will be held in Boston , Massachusetts and will provide an opportunity for researchers and professional practitioners , in all the disciplines in the earthquake field , to come together and exchange research results , design practices , and organizational and policy perspectives that influence the effectiveness of earthquake preparedness , mitigation , and recovery .
The Proceedings provide a valuable repository of information , critical to the future advancement of earthquake engineering .
AbstractIn many imaging applications , mobile agents -- such as untethered reconnaissance robots and micro air vehicles -- transmit and receive bandwidth-intensive image data over wireless networks .
A key issue in developing small , mobile agents is minimizing their power requirements .
The most significant source of power dissipation in a wireless communications system is the transmission of data over the wireless link .
Compressing the data before transmission is a direct way to significantly decrease power requirements ; thus , effective image compression algorithms are critical to realizing a mobile , wireless , real-time , high quality imaging system.Various hardware platforms can be considered for mobile computing .
Of these platforms , field programmable gate arrays ( FPGAs ) are the most compelling for wireless , mobile , fast , low-power , handheld/wearable/embedded , image compression devices.FPGAs can be used as the basis for implementations that are low cost , easily updated , and significantly faster than microprocessor-based implementations .
The objective of this project is twofold to design new , efficient image compression algorithms and to design , build , demonstrate and evaluate FPGA implementations of state-of-the-art image compression systems .
Our close-knit interdisciplinary team of image compression and hardware specialists will allow for end-to-end system performance analysis.This critical assessment is almost never performed and yet it is important to understanding the combined effects of algorithmic and implementation design choices.In addition , two or three real-world interdisciplinary projects that can be utilized in senior-level digital signal processing and digital design classes will be designed and published .
The Dissertations Initiative for the Advancement of Limnology and OceanoGraphy ( DIALOG ) is an interdisciplinary project that works through several professional societies to target recent Ph.D. recipients across the full spectrum of disciplines relevant to the biologically oriented aquatic sciences .
This project will quantify and characterize recent aquatic science Ph.D.s , consolidate and disseminate Ph.D. dissertation abstracts , establish electronic lists to facilitate distribution of job opportunities , and run an international capstone symposium for selected recent graduates to foster interdisciplinary insight , peer networking , and early career development .
DIALOG will foster international as well as inter ? institutional contacts , and include graduates from both developing and developed countries .
Demographic data will facilitate the characterization and tracking of human resources .
The on ? line Dissertation Registry will provide a comprehensive yet concise summary of new research for scientists , policy makers , and agency representatives and facilitates integration of a new generation of researchers into the broader community .
The electronic distribution list will provide a mechanism to target and disseminate information across institutions and foster communication across disciplinary and international boundaries .
The international symposium will support participant diversity at all levels , and bring together individuals whose work transcends traditional boundaries .
Activities will establish peer networks and enhance insights and perspectives to accelerate career development and advance interdisciplinary approaches to science .
This dissertation investigates how appropriate social networks help explain the relative success of four conservation and development projects in two regions in Brazil .
The mobilization of multiple stakeholders , both local and beyond the project region , are critical for sustainable development .
These networks also help diffuse a new identity supporting environmentally sustainable resource use .
Both mobilization and diffusion depend on overlapping ties among the various stakeholders .
Ethnographic and interview methods will be used to collect data on network connections and the flow of resources through those networks .
Our world is composed of many ethnic communities in diaspora , each maintaining to a different degree a sense of identity related to their culture of origin .
This research by cultural anthropologists studies patterns of variation in the cultural identity of Welsh communities .
The current research adds two communities , one in Patagonia ( Argentina ) which retains the Welsh language and a variety of other cultural practices , and one in Ohio where Welsh-Americans live in self-consciously Welsh communities , but without retaining the language .
The new information from this project will be integrated with that from previous studies of Welsh communities in Australia and Iowa as well as Wales .
Hypotheses dealing with the importance of language , ethnic museums , performances , innovation in traditional institutions , and cultural exchange with Wales will be tested .
Using a variety of methods including in-depth interviews and consensus analysis , a statistical technique that describes patterns of agreement and disagreement among individuals , the study will advance our understanding of the cultural construction of identity among diaspora communities .
The broader impacts of the research will be important as the project will allow us to better understand how identity politics works in relation to cultural visibility .
This dissertation project posits that biomedicine , even in the face of mounting ethical dilemmas raised by Islamic scholars ' condemnations of new body-modifying and life-altering possibilities such as organ donation , maintains authority and social legitimacy in the culture of contemporary Egypt .
Further , the project proposes that the Egyptian state plays a crucial role in maintaining biomedical authority and its cultural legitimacy by closely mediating the relationship between Egypt 's biomedical community and theopinions of Islamic legal scholarship .
The project seeks to critique the polarization of Islam and science , predominant in local and international discourse , by uncovering the ways in which the production of knowledge about bioethics in the domains of biomedicine and Islamic scholarship in Egypt in fact occur within the same social and structural field .
This study further questions how patients ' interests and understandings of bioethical dilemmas fit within this institutional complex in Egypt through a detailed ethnography of the reception and application of emerging biomedical technologies , Islamic legal decisions about them , state legislation , and their consumption by the general public .
The politics of organ donation , currently the central problematic in contemporary Egyptian bioethics , constitutes a primary site through which to analyze how these various institutions manage bioethical debates .
The project will rely on ethnographic analysis of biomedical practice involving organ donation in clinical settings ( based in Kasr el Aini Teaching Hospital ) in order to analyze patients ' lived experiences of these debates .
Specifically , it will examine the ways in which physicians and patients encounter and manage ethical dilemmas .
Further evidence will be drawn from analyses of medical training in ethics ( whether explicit or implicit ) , interviews with Islamic legal scholars and state legislators , and textual analyses of contemporary bioethical debates in Egypt ( including Islamic legal texts , state legislative reports and decisions , media reports , and biomedical treatises ) .
This project will contribute significantly to the study of how Islamic scholarship deals with , and may often be overshadowed by , new scientific knowledge .
It will also offer a non-western case study to the emerging field of science studies , in which scholars have provided analyses of the ways in which biomedical knowledge is produced and codified into daily practice .
By focusing on ethics in an Islamic context , this study will offer new insights into the role religion plays in simultaneously embracing and shunning new biotechnologies .
The study focuses on the place of an Islamic response to biotechnologies within the confines of the modern state , and within the context of global debates about bio-ethics .
Results from this research will have broader implications for understanding what the collusion among dominant fields of knowledge ( Islamic scholarship , science , and state legislature ) , in their negotiation of bio-ethical concerns , means for ordinary people faced with new technological possibilities for the management of their lives .
The majority of biological databases today are broad , but shallow , covering large amounts of material but in a relatively cursory way .
These are essential resources as scientists use molecular biological techniques to develop a catalog of the molecules founds in living cell .
Now , it is time to move beyond simply cataloguing the molecules of a cell toward the time for understanding the dynamic interactions between molecules within a cell .
This level of understanding requires a different kind of database , one that links together sequence , genetics , structure and function to create a deeper resource .
The existing Protein Kinase Resource ( PKR , http//pkr.sdsc.edu ) will be extended to create a resource from which both novices and experts can learn about protein kinases , an important family of enzymes that play roles in processes as diverse as human disease and crop production .
From a technical standpoint , the resource will integrate data from a variety of existing resources in ways not previously achieved .
The integration at UCSD provides a location for developing detailed and well defined application program interfaces ( APIs ) that will allow these resources to interoperate .
It will deliver both content and technological advances in the field of biological databases .
All data , software and specifications will be publicly available .
Beyond students involved in the research , workshops will provide instruction in community annotation of kinases using the PKR and ways to adapt the database for other uses .
Modules of the database and APIs will enable the utilization of this work by other groups interested in other enzyme families .
0217075 TooleAnalysis of existing finestructure and microstructure data will be conducted .
The data , derived from two recent investigations of ocean mixing processes the Brazil Basin Tracer Release Experiment and the study of Circulation in the Romanche Fracture Zone , consist of vertical profile observations from the High-Resolution Profiler and moored current meter measurements .
Several signals in these data will be explored , documented , and presented in the scientific literature that address ( 1 ) the nature of the finescale shear and strain and the associated turbulent dissipation in the abyssal ocean above rough bathymetry ( at subtropical latitudes and on the equator ) , ( 2 ) the flow within a mid-ocean ridge fracture , ( 3 ) the intensity and spatial distribution of turbulent dissipation in a field of equatorially trapped deep jets , and ( 4 ) the intensity of the mid-depth internal wave field and associated mixing at tropical latitudes away from the immediate vicinity of the equator .
The projects are related by the common goal of improving understanding of mixing and diapycnal transport in the deep ocean .
Proposal AbstractSES 0217508Population Science and the Making of China 's One-Child-Per-Couple Policy , 1975-2000Susan Greenhalgh , University of California-IrvineThe development of modern science and technology has played a crucial part in China 's post-Mao economic and global ascent .
Important political dimensions of Chinese science have been studied , but key issues in science studies -- in particular , how scientific knowledge is created , and how science shapes public policy and society -- remain largely unexplored in the Chinese context .
China 's controversial one-child-per-couple policy , introduced in 1979-80 , provides a striking case of the impact of science on policy and society .
In the U.S. , both scholarly and popular thinking associates the policy with China 's ( repressive ) politics , not its ( weak ) science .
Yet interviews with Chinese insiders suggest that , behind the scenes , Chinese population scientists , borrowing heavily from western science ( especially the limits- to- growth models of the 1970s ) , played a critical role in the making ( and later unmaking ) of the one-child policy .
Today that role remains shrouded in mystery .
This project seeks to open the black box , Chinese population science to see how its central notions of population crisis and the one-child policy as the only solution were constructed , how they evolved over 25 years , and how they produced their extraordinary political and social effects .
Taking seriously the science in the social sciences , the project draws on science studies , histories of numbers , and governmentality studies to develop a science studies approach to population science ( or demography ) and its role in population governance .
The approach seeks to problematize the term population by showing how population is actively constituted as a domain of science and governance , and how population problems such as crises and their optimal policy solutions are humanly constructed by historically situated actors operating in highly consequential political and cultural contexts .
This project is the first to theorize the science of population and its connections to population governance in a non-Western context .
The China work should underscore the unappreciated power of population science and make clear the stakes involved in how we view the human sciences.The project involves interviewing influential Chinese scientists and policymakers ( as well as selected foreign scholars and practitioners ) ; visiting policy pilot projects ; and conducting archival research on the history of population science- and policy-making .
During ten years as anthropologist and policy analyst at the Population Council , a nonprofit research organization , the PI built up a large personal network in Chinese demographic and policymaking circles , acquired an extensive specialist vocabulary , and gained a reputation as a friend of China .
This familiarity with China 's population field helps ease problems of access to interviewees and material .
The first project covered in this grant is a continuation of work with on the estimation of general equilibrium models of the labor market ( supported by NSF-SBR 9730657 ) .
It is well known but rarely addressed by applied microeconomists that one can not properly evaluate national policies in a partial equilibrium environment .
This is particularly true for policies that address skill acquisition .
When using data to perform policy analysis , labor economists typically only concern themselves with the supply of skill and ignore demand .
The problem is that as the number of individuals possessing a particular skill increases , the value the skill in the labor market falls .
This effect discourages skill formation .
Our previous research shows that accounting for general equilibrium effects when performing policy evaluations can alter the results by as much as a factor of ten .
The major weakness of our work to date is the empirical approach .
We have estimated the parameters of the individual worker using standard methods which implicitly assume that the labor market is not changing over time .
This steady state assumption is clearly questionable as there has been a large literature demonstrating the changes in the wage structure .
The biggest problem is that the model we estimated is not consistent with the general equilibrium model that we used when we simulated it .
The main goal of this work is to estimate a dynamic general equilibrium model of the U.S. labor market over the last thirty years .
This involves simultaneously estimating and simulating the model accounting for the changing U.S. labor market .
This procedure guarantees similarity between the simulated model and the U.S. economy .
We are using the estimated model to examine several different policies aimed to address the increasing inequality in the workforce .
A major goal of these programs is to lower earnings inequality .
This version of the model will provide a consistent estimate of the distribution of earnings in the economy and will allow us to do a much better job of estimating the effects of the policies on earnings inequality than our previous work .
We are also extending the model to consider the effects of welfare policies and wage subsidies aimed a low wage workers as well as a number of other policies aimed at addressing earnings inequality.The goal of the second project is to address one particular aspect that is likely to be very important in most implementations of difference-in-differences estimators .
Identification of the key parameter often arises when a unit changes some particular policy .
Researchers typically assume that the product of the number of observations and time period is large when they perform inference in their models .
However , even when the number of units or time periods is large , the number of actual policy changes observed in the data is typically small .
In this case these standard methods that researchers use for inference in these models are not appropriate and may be wildly misleading .
We are developing two different approaches which allow researchers to perform inference in these models .
For the first approach we assume that there are a finite number of policy changes in the data , but use asymptotic approximations as the product of the number of observations and time period gets large .
In the second , we avoid large sample approximations altogether by using exact tests .
The goal of this dissemination project is to develop a model public service ad campaignthat will advance the participation of women and girls in SMET through effecting apositive shift in attitudes among parents , educators , students and others in the communityregarding girls ' pursuit of interests / careers in SMET .
The projects lead institution is Stony Brook University and collaborating organizations / institutions include the Long Island Fund for Women and Girls , Briarcliffe College , and television stations WLIW21 ( PBS ) and WLNY55.This informal education project will develop a series of dynamic television spots , to bedisseminated through local television broadcasts and through online links .
The target audienceconsists of parents , educators and other authority figures , as well as peers , who have a great deal of influence over young peoples ' perceptions of their educational and future professional options .
Spots will reflect research findings that illustrate currentgender inequities in SMET education and careers , and de-bunk some of the commonly accepted beliefs regarding gender-related causes for these disparities ; information about often ignored or unremarked historical and current contributions of women inSMET ; and national statistics on professional shortages in the SMETemployment pool.This video campaign will attempt to re-shape public attitudes regarding the genderappropriateness of girls ' SMET pursuits .
Using psychosocial research as a guide , theproject will disseminate information in ways that may directly alter attitudes amongindividuals in the targeted groups , as well as encourage new behaviors that may thentrigger compensatory attitude changes .
This is a novel approach which combinestechnology-based applications , marketing strategies , and psychosocial research to target change in specific underlying public attitudes that hinder the participation of girls andyoung women in SMET .
SES-0217287PI ( s ) Linda MolmUniversity of ArizonaThe research is part of a long-term project investigating how different forms of social exchange affect major exchange outcomes .
In previous work the PI established that negotiated exchange-in which actors jointly bargain over the terms of strictly binding agreements , and reciprocal exchanges-in which actors individually give benefits to each other without negotiation , have very different effects on behavioral and affective outcomes .
Reciprocal exchanges produce weaker power use , greater feelings of trust and affective commitment , and stronger perceptions of fairness than equivalent negotiated exchanges .
The goal of this research is to test the independent effects of three causal mechanisms proposed to account for these differences ( 1 ) the risk and uncertainty of exchange , ( 2 ) the relative salience of the competitive or cooperative aspects of exchange , and ( 3 ) the value of voluntary reciprocity .
The research focuses on affective outcomes ( feelings of trust , commitment , fairness , and solidarity ) , and extends the analysis to a third form of exchange , generalized ( or indirect ) exchange , that entails even greater differences in risk , salience of competition , and reciprocity.Five laboratory experiments test predictions related to these goals .
Experiments will be conducted to test the effects of risk and uncertainty on trust and commitment by manipulating whether negotiated agreements are binding or non-binding and whether actors can communicate their intentions in reciprocal exchanges .
Another experiment will test the effect of increasing the salience of competition on perceptions of fairness in reciprocal exchange , by allowing actors to choose not only which partner to reward , but also how much benefit to give .
Finally experiments will test the value that actors place on frequency and predictability of reciprocity , relative to the magnitude of benefits received and compare indirect ( generalized ) exchange with the two forms of direct exchange ( negotiated and reciprocal ) .The research will contribute to expanding the scope of contemporary theory and research on social exchange to include the full range of exchange forms that characterize social life .
Findings will also help explain why these forms of exchange have such different effects on the development of trust and affective ties North Carolina Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation - Phase IIIThe North Carolina Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation ( NC-LSAMP ) requestssupport for continuingits efforts during Phase III .
The LS-NCAMP Alliance includes eightpartner institutions - North Carolina A & T State University ( lead institution ) , FayettevilleState University , North Carolina Central University , North Carolina State University , University of North Carolina - Chapel Hill , University of North Carolina Charlotte , University of North Carolina - Pembroke , and Winston Salem State University .
TheProvost and Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs at North Carolina A & T State Universitywill lead the project with assistance from key administrators at all Alliance institutions .
This will ensure the effective institutionalization of the strategies proposed here .
The work proposed caps a decade long series of activities aimed primarily at increasing undergraduate degree production in Science , Mathematics , Engineering and Technology ( SMET ) .
Underrepresented minorities comprise 30 percent of the college-age population but they represent only 11 percent of the baccalaureate engineering graduates resulting in a parity gap of 19 percent .
The parity gap is even more pronounced at the master'sand doctoral level .
Clearly , more needs to be done to reduce this parity gap , more out ofeconomic necessity and to meet global competitive pressures than any other reason .
The efforts outlined in this proposal are aimed at meeting this challenge .
The activities proposed in this proposal are driven by the need to increase substantially the number of underrepresented minorities who will contribute significantly in science , mathematics , engineering and technology areas .
While the baccalaureate degree programs will receive continued attention , special emphasis will be placed on amplifying the flow of minority students in the graduate and research pipeline .
The primary goals of theproposal are ( i ) to increase the pool of competent underrepresented SMET graduates with bachelor 's degrees ( specific objectives include increasing the number of SMET graduates from bachelor 's degree programs by 10 % from allAlliance partner schools by2007 and increasing the quality of SMET bachelors degree graduates from all alliancepartner schools based on their performance in college courses and national examinationsby 50 % by 2007 ) and ( ii ) to increase the number of students who matriculate into SMET graduate schools ( specific objectives include increasing the number of SMET studentswho express an interest in graduate studies by 100 % by 2007 , increasing by 100 % , thenumber of SMET graduates who are academically qualified for admission to graduate programs by 2007 , increasing the number of SMET graduates from alliance partnerinstitutions who are enrolled in graduate SMET programs by 100 % by 2007 , and increasing the retention rate by 10 % of underrepresented students in graduate SMET programs ) .
An additional goal of the project is to identify significant factors that promote baccalaureatedegree attainment , retention in academic programs and entry into graduate school in SMET areas ( specific objectives are to identify significant factors that promote and hinder retention of minority students enrolled in SMETbaccalaureate degree programs , and to identify significant factors that promote and hinder entry of minorityundergraduate students into graduate SMET degree programs ) .Strategies for accomplishing project goals are based on published techniques that have proven successful in smaller samples .
Specifically , the approaches to be employed includefocused recruitment from school ; bridge programs to manage the school-college transition ; supplemental instruction , cohort scheduling and workshops for undergraduate students during the first year to enhance retention and preparation for upper-class coursework ; undergraduate research and professional development workshops aimed at motivating andpreparing students for graduate study ; and the development of networking and mentoring systems to improve retention in the first year in graduate school .
A key emphasis duringPhase III will be Alliance-wide institutionalization of proven strategies that have beenknown to improve the success rates of students in SMET.The Alliance partners together awarded over a thousand degrees and currently enroll over six thousand undergraduate minority students in SMET programs .
In addition to students in the Alliance , dissemination activities under this proposal have the potential to impact several thousand students each year .
There are celebrated cases where individual moral decision making in computing has mattered greatly , but there is little systematic work on how moral decisions are made by individual computer professionals .
The literature on organizational issues in computing has focused on variables such as status , power , and organizational imperatives .
It leads us to focus on situational parameters .
This important perspective ignores or underestimates the influence of the individual decision maker in the process .
This study explores the life stories of moral exemplars in computing in two cultures , those of Britain and Scandinavia .
These two cultures are an interesting contrast because the associated countries have been heavily involved in computing research and design , but their national cultures differ markedly in their approach to workplace values .
This case-based study , based on in-depth interviews and questionnaires , examines how particular moral exemplars in computing develop over time in their moral reasoning and action.This study will be done while the investigator is in residence at the Centre for Computing and Social Responsibility ( CCSR ) at De Montfort University , Leicester , UK .
A panel of experts in computing ethics refines criteria for selecting moral exemplars in computing in British and Scandinavian cultures , and then helps develop a snowball sample of those moral exemplars .
Once selected , the moral exemplars are asked to participate in interviews using a format called the Life Story Interview in which interviewees are asked to relate narratives of important episodes in their life ( e.g .
a peak experience , a nadir experience , a turning point ) .
The interviews are transcribed and coded to identify important developmental milestones and influences.This research breaks new ground by combining developmental work in moral psychology with concern for moral values and behavior on the part of computer professionals .
It will be of interest to psychologists studying moral reasoning and action and to the interdisciplinary field of computer ethics .
Scholars in the related field of social informatics will also be interested .
Finally , this exploratory research will provide an excellent foundation for a continuing research program in the moral development of computer professionals .
Much effort has been expended in talking about teaching computer ethics and we have various curricula as guidelines for teaching computer ethics .
If we knew something about what actually motivates computer professionals to be ethical , it might well change what ( or how ) we teach computer This Doctoral Dissertation investigates whether trade unions help or hinder economic development .
Because unions affect development by creating or disrupting social stability , it is crucial to know what protest strategies unions in South Asia pursue and why they pursue them .
Instead of conducting research along these lines , many scholars have relied on arguments supported by the experience of advanced industrial states .
This practice has led to a lack of evidence on the subject and a paucity of theory appropriate to the South Asian context .
The Principal Investigator will work to overcome this problem through an examination of the political economy of labor protest in six cities in South Asia ( Calcutta , Cochin , Colombo , Madras , Bombay , and Delhi ) during the period 1991-2000 .
This study advances the understanding of union behavior in South Asia on both theoretical and empirical fronts .
First , it employs a network-based theory of union behavior , which holds that union strategies differ based on a union 's degree of formalized connections to employers and institutions of the state .
Unions with more ties protest less , and use routine strategies of protest .
Unions without ties protest more , utilizing one of two alternatives extreme acts of violence or Scottian weapons of the weak .
This higher volume of alternative protest strategies disrupts economic development .
Evidence to test the theory will come from a ) hundreds of interviews with union leaders , government officials , and managers , b ) descriptions of thousands of protest events as reported in the Indian and Sri Lankan press and c ) two surveys of employers and investors .
The relationship between the network ties of unions and the strike tactics they pursue will be tested with Ordinary Least Squares cross-sectional regression models .
In these models , measures of strategies and volume of strike protest will be the dependent variables and measures of ties to parties and unions will be the primary independent variables of interest .
The impact of protest strategies on economic performance will be assessed through a variety of methods .
These will include 1 ) a survey of representatives of private sector firms in India ; 2 ) a survey of foreign investors in India ; 3 ) interviews with employers in India ; and 4 ) firm-level statistical models of absenteeism and productivity .
Project AbstractProposal 0217605Colonial Botany Gender , Politics , and Commerce between Europe and the West Indies in the Eighteenth CenturyLonda Schiebinger , Penn StateThe last several years have witnessed renewed interest in the history of botany , the big science of early modern Europe .
This book-length project explores the movement , triumph , suppression , and extinction of different botanical knowledges in 18th century encounters between Europeans and the inhabitants of the Caribbean .
The project has several purposes .
First , it asks scholarly audiences to consider the cultural politics of plants .
Plants rarely appear in undergraduate or graduate courses on European , American , World History or History of Science , and are rarely part of our grand narratives of war , peace , or even everyday life .
But they are important cultural artifacts , often at the center of political and economic struggles .
In the eighteenth-century , plants played a role in political struggles surrounding slavery ( slave women , for example , employed abortifacients to resist producing more field hands for plantation owners ) .
Plants also figured in battles between trading companies , states , and local bio-pirates for monopolies on profitable colonial commodities.Second , this project seeks to examine the linkage between colonial botany and gender relations .
While gender has received some attention in the history of eighteenth-century anthropology and travel literature and in the history of slavery , it has received relatively little in the history of colonial botany .
In this project , the PI explores how European gender relations guided naturalists as they explored other lands , peoples , and their knowledges .
Third , this project contributes to rethinking the history of botany .
A long-standing narrative has presented modern botany as the rise of taxonomy , nomenclature , and pure systems of classification .
This approach does not capture the realities of botany in the eighteenth century as a matter of state .
Emerging nation-states that vied for land and resources saw botanists who collected rare and beautiful plants for study and global exchange as crucial for European colonizing efforts in tropical climates .
Fourth , this project seeks to develop further and apply a new methodological tool that Robert Proctor has called agnatology -- the study of culturally-induced ignorances .
Agnatology refocuses questions about how we know to include questions about what we do not know and why not .
While much of the literature on colonial science has focused on how knowledge is made and transferred between continents , the PI explores the non-transfer of important bodies of knowledge from the New World to Europe.The PI will work in archives and libraries in Europe and the Caribbean to prepare a book , for a broad scholarly audience including those working in STS as well as botanists and naturalists .
This research project will study optimization algorithms rooted in the ideas of game theory in the context of complex network optimization , and particularly decentralized network optimization .
Probably the central issue in managing such decentralized networks has been how to set prices so as to motivate the competing users to evolve to an overall system optimal configuration .
The research will investigate the powerful paradigm of economic competition in the framework of artificial dynamic games that are played off-line , resulting in an algorithm that is potentially practical for large-scale systems optimization .
The basic paradigm that will be investigated derives from Fictitious Play which is an adaptive procedure wherein each player assumes that other players will play according to the empirical distribution of their previous plays .
The Fictitious Play method is a novel paradigm for optimization that draws from several distinct disciplines and application areas , including classical optimization , game theory , transportation science , and queueing network protocols .
The robust nature of the algorithm allows for the ill-structured black box models of real systems which seldom exhibit the kind of smoothness properties that classical optimization methods demand .
Its applicability in the context of two important real-world systems a ) internet traffic routing protocols and b ) dynamic route guidance will be tested .
Complex networks optimization is an important capability in a society increasingly dominated by ever more complex networks of people and machines .
Examples include intelligent transportation systems , computer networks , and supply chains of customers and suppliers .
The success of the research will lead to the development of a theoretical basis for the optimization of such complex-structured systems .
The applicability of the proposed algorithmic paradigm of game theory through its application to realistic problems arising in the design and operation of the communications and transportation networks will be tested and refined .
This research will not only lead to potential improvements in these application arenas but will also necessitate significant interactions with industry and government to insure realism for the models and data developed .
0217716MoaddelDescription This award is to support a US-Egypt Workshop on Explaining the Worldviews of the Islamic Publics Theoretical and Methodological Issues , to be held in Cairo , Egypt , December 2002 .
The organizer is Dr. Mansoor Moaddel , Professor , Department of Sociology , Anthropology and Criminology , Eastern Michigan University , Ypsilanti , Michigan .
The co-organizer is Dr. Abdel-Hamid Abdel-Latif , Professor of Sociology , Ain Shams University , Cairo , Egypt .
This meeting will bring together the social scientists from the United States and Islamic countries who were involved in carrying out national surveys of the attitudes and value orientations of the Islamic publics in Algeria , Egypt , Indonesia , Iran , Jordan , Morocco , and Pakistan .
This is the first time that comprehensive comparative surveys have been carried out in several major Islamic countries , generating a sociologically important data set .
The questionnaire used in these surveys was based on key batteries of the World Values Survey questionnaire , as well as a series of items that were specifically designed for Islamic countries .
To advance the fundamental knowledge of Islamic societies , the participants will address in a collective fashion several methodological and theoretical concerns .
These include comparison of different translations of the questionnaire , an assessment of the final sampling frame used in the study , and an analysis of the findings within varying cultural and political contexts .
Scope This meeting expands the basis of social science understanding of Islamic societies by strengthening the network among social scientists that the comparative survey has generated .
It deals with a topic that is of current importance in the United States and in the Islamic countries .
The project is funded jointly by the Office of International Science and Engineering and the Division of Social and Economic Sciences .
This project will study the gendered nature of learning science in the elementary grades.Standards-based science instruction largely consists of students engaging in first-handinvestigation of scientific phenomena .
This is in contrast to traditional science instruction that relies heavily on textbooks .
The justification for investigation-based instructional design has typically been that the authority for scientific belief ought toreside in the actions of children rather than the authority of text .
However , this unfortunate dichotomy between investigation and text undermines the potential uses of both.Girls are typically strong readers- an attribute that ought to make them strong in science.After all , at some point they must be able to read scientific text to excel in science classes.Unfortunately , research on text preferences shows that although girls are strong readers , they prefer to read fiction rather than nonfiction .
The primary objective of the project is to learn how science-related text embedded in inquiry science instruction can be used to engage girls.The first year of this three year study willbe spent in four third gradeclassrooms to observe how science-related texts are used .
This will include documentation of text experiences created by teachers and created by girls in encounters with text supplemental to regular instruction ( e.g. , library visits , classroom-reading centers , books from home ) .
This will besupplemented by classroom observations and interviews with girls , teachers , librarians and parents to collect additional data on the use of and interest in science books.The second year of the project will consist of design experiments in the classroomsduring which the teachers and researchers work together to analyze classroom activities and design instruction in cycles that allow research and teaching practice to influence one another .
Data from the first year will be used to better understand how girls may engage with science text and design instruction to maximize girls interest in scienceand learning from science inquiry instruction that includes the use of text.The research questions are as follows1 .
What role does text play in girls classroom science experiences ? 2 .
How do teachers view the role of text in girls ' learning of science ? 3 .
What texts are present in girls ' homes and how are they used ? 4 .
What science texts do girls prefer when exposed to a large range of text genres anduses ? 5 .
How do girls uses of text enable and/or constrain their engagement and developmentof scientific ideas ? The final year will be spent analyzing results of the design experiment and conducting cross-year analyses , preparing research papers for submission to science and literacyeducation journals , and developing a web-based curriculum unit for use in teachereducation programs , including our own NSF-sponsored science teacher education reform effort .
This project analyzes the impact of the stock market on the innovative capabilities of high-technology companies that have been central to the new economy .
Through in-depth comparative analyses of the accumulation of innovative capabilities at various major optical networking companies , the impacts of the changing roles of the stock market as well as the impact of volatility in stock prices will be evaluated .
In the speculative boom of the late '90s , many highly touted start-ups with little revenue were able to do IPOs with only a small portion of their stock being issued to the public while raising unprecedented amounts of cash that could fund future growth .
A high stock price became important in the competitive bidding among these companies for high-technology acquisitions , and hence played an important role in determining which companies would exercise strategic control over new technologies that they did not develop in-house .
Then , to develop and utilize the acquired technologies , the acquirer had to integrate the capabilities of the acquired companies with its own capabilities .
This meant using a stock-based compensation for recruiting and retaining key personnel , mostly in non-executive positions , who might otherwise have gone to work for competitors .
In established companies , stock option packages were used to keep personnel from leaving to join start ups .
Corporate stock thus came to play an important ole in the accumulation of innovative capabilities by both new ventures and going concerns .
This project analyzes the impact of the use of corporate stock as an acquisition and compensation currency on the accumulation of innovative capabilities by major optical networking firms .
How did such use of stock , entailing as it did pressure on corporate executives to maintain high stock prices , affect the strategic decisions of these executives to invest in innovative capabilities ?
Did the existence of start-ups and high stock valuations bias top managers toward acquiring innovative capabilities externally when their companies may have accumulated these capabilities more effectively through internal development of the technologies ?
Did the use of stock options as a key component of compensation packages for large numbers of managerial and technical personnel motivate these employees to engage in organizational learning for the companies that employed them ?
Or did it encourage highly individualistic behavior , with concern for mobility within the labor market ?
Has the use of corporate stock as an acquisition and compensation currency in the boom made these companies more vulnerable than otherwise to the slump ?
Has the role of stock changed in the downturn ?
This project promises to provide useful answers to guide corporate growth strategies in the future .
Award # 0139398Tarokh , VahidDr .
Vahid Tarokh , a recognized leader in the research field of wireless communications , will receive the National Science Foundation 's ( NSF ) Alan T. Warterman award for his work as the primary inventor of space time coding , a new technique that significantly improves the speed and reliability of wireless data transmission.These innovations helped form international standards for the latest cell phones , personal digital assistants and other wireless devices .
By some estimates , more than one billion handsets might be employing the space-time codes within five years .
ABSTRACT OPP-0240823OvereemModels of sediment supply to the Arctic coastal zones predict pronounced increase of sediment influx as a result of a warming climate .
Yet estimates are still uncertain , because 1 ) the numerical climate-sedimentary models do not model rare high-energy events ; 2 ) lateral changes in the fluvial transporting system , i.e. , higher discharges due to climatic warming inducing channel switches and increased floodplain sedimentation , have previously not been modeled .
It is expected that these model limitations have the most important implications for drainage basins with relatively gentle topography , for example , rivers draining a hinterland land-ice cap .
This project proposes to advance the climate-driven hydrological model , HydroTrend , to incorporate low-frequency high-magnitude events , such as glacial lake outbursts .
Simulated high-resolution discharge and sediment load series , which is output from HydroTrend , can directly be fed into our three-dimensional sedimentary model , SedFlux3D .
Previous theoretical experiments show that increased sediment supply is a dominant factor in causing channel switches and of significant importance for progradation rates of fluvio-deltaic systems into the offshore .
These two concepts will be tested against field data of Clyde River , East Baffin Island , which drains the Barnes Ice Cap .
Regional hydrological and meteorological data from weather stations in combination with aerial photograph and satellite image interpretation yields the required input for HydroTrend .
Field measurements of grain size trends , floodplain sedimentation , and channel dimensions of the Clyde River will be compared with output of SedFlux3D.Intellectual merit and broader impact .
The response of Arctic river systems to climate change is a largely unknown component of climate change scenarios .
The improved models will allow systematic testing of the impact of high-energy events , which is otherwise hard to quantify , because of the relatively short measurement records in the High Arctic .
Furthermore , the model will enhance predictions of sediment flux into the ocean .
In a wider perspective , the project opens up new horizons to the integration of glaciological models and three dimensional sedimentary models .
At the NSF sponsored meeting on 'A Strategy for a Community Sediment Model ' , the link between glaciological and sedimentary models was recognized as one of the areas where important scientific progress can and shall be made .
The Clyde River forms a unique present-day setting , but is a representative 'type-location ' for the entire U.S. east margin under glacial conditions .
The present offshore stratigraphic architecture depends heavily on the sedimentary processes during the last glacial period .
Improved models of the stratigraphic architecture of the shallow coastal zone will facilitate coastal management .
This experimental program will exploit technological advances that establish nuclear resonance vibrational spectroscopy ( NRVS ) as a site-specific , quantitative probe for vibrational dynamics in iron- containing proteins and model compounds .
Ultrahigh resolution synchrotron-based measurements of X-ray absorption near the 14.4keV 57-Fe Moessbauer resonance reveal the complete vibrational spectrum of Fe.. NRVS provides quantitative information on vibrational amplitudes as well as frequencies and allows one to deduce the direction of Fe motion from measurements on oriented samples .
Observations will include structurally sensitive modes , or vibrational spectators , that are not easily measurable using other techniques .
A theme of particular interest is the identification and characterization of vibrational participants , modes directly involved in biological reactions .
Fe is the reactive center of many biological reactions , and reactive modes involving the Fe must contribute to the NRVS signal .
Measurements on Fe porphyrin powders and single crystals , coupled with normal mode analysis , will establish the character of observed modes , including participants , and provide a basis for interpreting measurements on proteins .
An issue of particular interest in the protein studies is whether vibrations remain localized at the active site , or acquire a more global character by vibrational mixing with the surrounding polypeptide , and the structural factors responsible for this local or global character .
The project will have a broad impact in at least three areas ( 1 ) Work on this project is an outstanding training opportunity .
( 2 ) The project establishes collaborative ties between disciplines and institutions , necessitating diverse expertise in synthetic chemistry , molecular biology , and modern computational approaches .
( 3 ) Development and dissemination of next-generation instrumentation at a multi-user facility is an integral aspect of the proposed work , as Instrumental advances developed in support of the proposed work become available to other synchrotron users .
This award is co-sponsored by the Physics Division in the Mathematical and Physical Science Directorate and the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological Sciences .
In the last three decades , studies in the history and sociology of technology have taught us a great deal about the processes of invention , development , and diffusion .
However , very few of these studies bring the insights of the history of technology to bear on medical and reproductive technologies , despite the fact that these technologies are having an enormous social , ethical and economic impact on today 's world .
By placing these reproductive technologies in their proper historical context , this dissertation research project will not only elucidate the issues with which our predecessors struggled , but also shed a ray of light on the current debates over pregnancy termination and the likely social impact of new technologies such as RU-486 .
Almost nothing is known , historically , about the science and technology of pregnancy termination .
No scholar has ever thoroughly explored the changing technologies of pregnancy termination during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries , and no effort has been made to understand how these changing technologies were connected to the politics of medical professionalization , specialization , and commercialization .
This dissertation project seeks to fill this historical vacuum .
This study will trace the changes in pregnancy termination technology from 1850 ( when herbal methods began to be replaced by surgical methods , and knowledge about fertilization was growing ) to 1980 ( by which time numerous new surgical methods had been developed and diffused , both fertilization and ovulation were well understood , and the different stages of fetal development had been demarcated ) .
Since pregnancy termination has always been a politically charged subject , these scientific and technological changes must , of necessity , be viewed within the context of a variety of disputes disputes between laypeople and professionals about who should be licensed to control pregnancy termination ; disputes between men and women about who should be responsible for fertility control ; disputes between those who want the procedure to be legal and those who want it banned ; disputes between advocates of one technological system over another .
This dissertation project will thus be a study both in the social construction of technology and in the technological construction of one very significant social process -- pregnancy termination .
In preliminary research , the Co-PI has uncovered material in published sources ( medical journals , medical textbooks , patent records , trade catalogues ) and in archival collections .
NSF funds support travel to other relevant archival collections .
AbstractCHE-0240172Shultz/TuftsThis research project , with the support of the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program , addresses the detailed structure of the ice surface .
Using the adsorption of several probe molecules combined with sum frequency generation studies of the vibrational spectroscopy of the ice surface , the location and mobility of hydrogen atoms on the ice surface will be determined .
Professor Shultz and her coworkers in the Department of Chemistry at Tufts University will examine the basic structure and reactivity of the single crystal ice surface .
This information will be useful for developing a basic understanding of the chemistry of ice surfaces , important in planetary atmospheres , terrestrial meteorology , and stratospheric chemical kinetics .
Using the technique of sum frequency generation spectroscopy , Professor Shultz and her group at Tufts University are examining the surface of well characterized ice crystals .
By examining the interaction of the ice surface with various probe molecules , the location and motion of hydrogen atoms on the ice surface will be determined .
The basic information obtained from these studies is relevant to tropospheric and stratospheric molecule transport and reaction .
This research advances the capabilities for performing thermal measurements at small scales , which in turn , facilitates the design , development , and production of devices and systems for commercial and government applications based on micro- and nanotechnologies .
Micro- and nanosystems are enabling innumerable exciting and beneficial applications for society ; however , many challenges are created by miniaturization including thermal measurement at small scales , below 100 microns .
The development of alternative and easy to use thermal metrology methods is necessary for the design , development , and optimization of microelectromechanical systems ( MEMS ) and nanoelectromechanical systems ( NEMS ) .
The temperature sensors are based on the thermomechanical response of a structure when heated so that it thermal expands differently than the underlying substrate .
Since only optical access is needed to make the measurement , this temperature-sensing scheme can be used in harsh environments , e.g .
high temperatures , where electrical signals can no longer be obtained .
Additionally , these microsensors will be used to study fundamental issues of microscale energy transport such as the amount of convection and radiation at small scales .
This research program will train students in fabrication and characterization skills needed in micro- and nanotechnology industries , and the results will be broadly disseminated to the scientific community and public .
The award is funded by the Thermal Transport and Thermal Processing Program of the Chemical and Transport Systems Division .
This is a collaborative proposal by Principal Investigators at the Universities of Wisconsin-Madison and Cincinnati .
About 20 % of the Arctic Coastal Plain is covered by thaw lakes developed over ice- rich permafrost and a larger proportion of this landscape is also scarred by drained thaw-lake basins , which become sites for the accumulation of organic carbon as peat deposits .
The Principal Investigators will study of the origin of thaw-lake basins and associated geomorphological , biological , and pedological processes , building on work done on the Barrow Peninsula during 2000-2002 .
High-resolution multispectral satellite data will quantify the size frequency distribution and derive morphometric characteristics for lakes and drained thaw-lake basins across the Coastal Plain .
In addition , drained lake basins will be selected for intensive ground-based analysis between Barrow and Atqasuk .
The PIs will use the vegetation to select an equal number of young , medium , old and ancient drained thaw-lake basins .
Ground-penetrating radar and extensive winter soil coring will be used to map unconformities between underlying lake sediments and the post-drainage organic deposit .
Combined with satellite imagery to determine the areal dimensions , the volume of organics within the 40 basins will be estimated to determine the amount of soil carbon stored in the organic layer and upper lacustrine deposits .
These results will estimate the amount of carbon sequestered in drained basins .
Radiometric dating of the in situ peat above the clastic lake basin sediments will estimate of the date of lake drainage and basin inception .
There is evidence to suggest that these events may be related to climatic change , while other lakes have drained in response to coastal erosion .
The research will use paleoecological indicators to reconstruct the spatial and temporal response of vegetation and soil to climate on the Coastal Plain during the Holocene .
High-frequency core dating will be used to derive carbon accumulation rates and organic soil chemistry and state of decomposition to determine whether carbon accumulation rates respond to regional changes in climate or if they are influenced to a greater degree by local rates of plant succession .
Extensive spatial and temporal analysis of thaw-lake basins will 1 ) add to our understanding of the basic processes responsible for these important elements of the northern Alaskan landscape , 2 ) provide new information on landscape-scale response to climate change , and 3 ) help develop and validate causative models of environmental change and carbon sequestering .
Broader impacts include 1 ) accessing traditional knowledge of local elders in Barrow , who have primary and secondary information on recent lake drainage and flooding events ; 2 ) enhancing education of students at the Barrow High School through the recently established NASA-funded Alaskan Native Remote Sensing Education Project ; 3 ) strengthening links with other U.S. agencies ; and 4 ) continuing to provide scientific training to undergraduate students through several NSF programs .
All satellite imagery , core stratigraphy , Global Positioning System transects , and pollen/microfossil data will be made publicly available through web sites , archives at the National Snow and Ice Data Center , and the Paleoenvironmental Arctic Sciences web site .
The World Summit will be the largest summit in UN history .
This global summit is a follow-on to the1992 UN Conference on Environment and Development held in Rio de Janeiro .
The WSSD will be in Johannesburg 26 August-7 September and over 100 heads of state are expected to attend .
A key U.S. message for the WSSD is the importance of concrete action on sustainable development .
To reinforce this message , the Smithsonian Institution is developing an exhibit that showcases projects and activities demonstrating the key U.S. themes for WSSD , interweaving governance , finance , science & technology , and partnerships.The Smithsonian has taken the leadership in the USG interagency process on developing and coordinating the US exhibit at the World Summit .
Federal Departments and agencies are co-funding the U.S. presence .
NSF co-funding will provide supplies and services necessary to develop , install , and maintain the joint U.S. exhibit and to support the NSF involvement at the Exhibit .
The Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research ( IAI ) was created by an international agreement concluded among representatives of American States , namely the Agreement Establishing the Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research , done at Montevideo on May 13 , 1992 ( the IAI Agreement ) .
The IAI Agreement created an intergovernmental organization for the purposes of coordinating and promoting scientific research related to global change .
The Institute has an evolving Scientific Agenda identifying particular areas for research .
Full membership in the IAI is limited to States , although the IAI Agreement also provides for non-State entities to become Associates of the Institute.The Institute is governed by an annual Conference of the Parties , and by a subsidiary Executive Council ( EC ) .
The US Government currently serves on the EC .
The Institute has a permanent secretariat , the Directorate .
The procedures and practices of the IAI 's governing institutions are elaborated in detailed rules of procedure .
The IAI thus possesses the fundamental institutional characteristics of an international organization it was created by international agreement , is composed of States and is governed by governing bodies composed of representatives of States.The US Government participates actively in the IAI .
The United States played a leading role in the creation of the IAI and has been an active participant in the IAI since its creation .
Senior US Government officials serve on the Executive Council and hold other responsible positions related to IAI activities .
Furthermore , the IAI has been listed by the State Department and by the Office of Personnel Management as an international organization within the meaning of the Federal Employees International Organization Service Act , covered by 5 U.S.C .
3343 and 5 U.S.C .
3581.Core Budget support , for which this proposal is submitted , allows the operation of the Directorate of the IAI , and provides support for its scientific advisory body .
Currently , the IAI Directorate is hosted by Brazil in Sao Jose dos Campos , Sao Paulo state , on the campus of the Brazilian National Space Research Institute ( INPE ) , where the IAI Directorate functions as an internationally recognized juridical personality , with the corresponding privileges and immunities granted by the Government of Brazil.The IAI receives Core Budget contributions from the other Parties to the Agreement Establishing the IAI Argentina , Brazil , Canada , Chile , Colombia , Costa Rica , Cuba , the Dominican Republic , Ecuador , Guatemala , Jamaica , Mexico , Panama , Paraguay , Peru , Uruguay , and Venezuela .
Amounts are arrived at by consensus at an annual meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the IAI Agreement.The IAI is a U.S. initiative to stimulate cooperative research on global change issues among the scientific institutions of the Americas .
The National Science Foundation is the lead U.S. Government agency designated by the White House to carry out U.S. responsibilities within the IAI. % % % The Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research ( IAI ) was created by an international agreement concluded among representatives of American States , namely the Agreement Establishing the Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research , done at Montevideo on May 13 , 1992 ( the IAI Agreement ) .
The IAI Agreement created an intergovernmental organization for the purposes of coordinating and promoting scientific research related to global change .
The Institute has an evolving Scientific Agenda identifying particular areas for research .
Full membership in the IAI is limited to States , although the IAI Agreement also provides for non-State entities to become Associates of the Institute.The Institute is governed by an annual Conference of the Parties , and by a subsidiary Executive Council ( EC ) .
The US Government currently serves on the EC .
The Institute has a permanent secretariat , the Directorate .
The procedures and practices of the IAI 's governing institutions are elaborated in detailed rules of procedure .
The IAI thus possesses the fundamental institutional characteristics of an international organization it was created by international agreement , is composed of States and is governed by governing bodies composed of representatives of States.The US Government participates actively in the IAI .
The United States played a leading role in the creation of the IAI and has been an active participant in the IAI since its creation .
Senior US Government officials serve on the Executive Council and hold other responsible positions related to IAI activities .
Furthermore , the IAI has been listed by the State Department and by the Office of Personnel Management as an international organization within the meaning of the Federal Employees International Organization Service Act , covered by 5 U.S.C .
3343 and 5 U.S.C .
3581.Core Budget support , for which this proposal is submitted , allows the operation of the Directorate of the IAI , and provides support for its scientific advisory body .
Currently , the IAI Directorate is hosted by Brazil in Sao Jose dos Campos , Sao Paulo state , on the campus of the Brazilian National Space Research Institute ( INPE ) , where the IAI Directorate functions as an internationally recognized juridical personality , with the corresponding privileges and immunities granted by the Government of Brazil.The IAI receives Core Budget contributions from the other Parties to the Agreement Establishing the IAI Argentina , Brazil , Canada , Chile , Colombia , Costa Rica , Cuba , the Dominican Republic , Ecuador , Guatemala , Jamaica , Mexico , Panama , Paraguay , Peru , Uruguay , and Venezuela .
Amounts are arrived at by consensus at an annual meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the IAI Agreement.The IAI is a U.S. initiative to stimulate cooperative research on global change issues among the scientific institutions of the Americas .
The National Science Foundation is the lead U.S. Government agency designated by the White House to carry out U.S. responsibilities within the IAI .
*** 0001315ThroneKnowledge of how electrical potential patterns on the heart surfaces evolve over time can be an extremely valuable tool in the diagnosis and treatment of a wide variety of cardiovascular diseases .
Hence , researchers have proposed numerous minimally invasive approaches for inferring cardiac electrical activity from measurements of electrical activity made at more accessible locations .
In these types of inverse problems the goal is to estimate an input ( the surface electrical potentials ) based on a measurement of the output ( the electrical activity measured at a less invasive location ) .
These particular inverse problems are extremely ill-conditioned , and consequently small errors in the measurements cause enormous ( hundreds of times larger ) errors in the estimated cardiac potentials .
The overall goal in this project is to employ data fusion -- systematic combination of signals from multiple sensors , types of sensors , and sensor locations -- to improve the potential estimates on the interior and exterior surfaces of the heart .
The development of minimally invasive , stable inverse techniques will substantially affect the treatment of cardiac disease .
In addition , the data fusion techniques developed for these inverse problems will impact research in such diverse fields as identifying sources of electrical activity within the brain , structural damage identification , electronics cooling , materials characterization , and online machine tool wear monitoring .
From 1969 through 1981 the National Science foundation awarded seven grants to Dr. Anthony Marks to conduct archaeological research in the Israeli Central Negev Desert .
A number of important open air sites were excavated and the results published in a multi-volume series .
The sites are important because they document the transitional period which led to the emergence of anatomically modern humans and the appearance of a modern range of fundamental behaviors .
Following accepted standards of the time , the collections were divided between the Israel Antiquities Authority in Jerusalem and Southern Methodist University ( SMU ) , Dr. Marks ' home institution .
Such a practice is no longer followed because of the difficulty it imposes on researchers who wish to study an entire collection .
Dr. Marks is now retiring from SMU and the institution no longer wishes to maintain either his or others ' Old World archaeological collections .
With NSF support , Dr. Marks and a student will systematize and pack the SMU material for shipping to the Israel Antiquities Authority which will reintegrate the collections and pay the actual transport costs.This project is significant because it will make an important archaeological collection available in its entirely for scientific study .
Metalliferous clays and Mn nodules and crusts contain highly radiogenic Hf isotopes and if subducted , the Hf isotopes could be used as a tracer for their presence in arc lavas .
The purpose of this proposed study is to analyze Hf and Nd isotopes in marine sediments from outboard 12 subduction systems to determine how prevalent this signature might be .
The origin of this unusual Hf isotopic fractionation is also uncertain , and these new data will help to constrain its cause .
Finally , the new data will be helpful for constraining the terrestrial mass balance of Hf and Nd isotopic systems .
The samples will mostly be ODP-drilled sediments obtained from arcs with potentially high variations of Hf isotopes and systems with very high sediment flux .
0240854BronzinoImportant advances in Cardiovascular Technologies occurred during the past decade ; implantable defibrillators , new stent designs for angioplasty , and heart assist devices including new artificial heart designs .
Additionally , there have been breakthroughs in tissue engineering that are expected to revolutionize the treatment of cardiovascular disease .
This area of technology is important with the Symposium and the associated Technology Fair being designed to provide practicing professionals and students interested in bioscience and engineering an opportunity to become familiar with some of the latest developments in the field .
The topics to be covered include Advances in the Design of the Artificial Heart , the ABIOCOR Artificial Heart Program , Frontiers of Organ and Tissue Replacement , Cardiovascular Tissue Engineering , Fetal Cardiology , Advances in Interventional Cardiology , and Electrical Mapping of the Heart .
The primary objectives of this Symposium and the Associated Technology Fair are Present insights into the new research and development efforts underway on developing new cardiovascular technologies.Present examples of successful academic/industrial collaborations in these areas.Provide the opportunity for researchers and entrepreneurs to present innovative approaches and products related to the entire field of biomedical engineering.As illustrated by the topics to be covered , the intellectual merit of the Symposium is high and will have significant impact on the bioscience and biomedical engineering community in the region .
Through the publication of the Proceedings a beneficial impact on students and professionals will extend to the national level .
The associated Technology Fair provides an opportunity for both students and professionals to discuss the process of innovation with those currently engaged in the technology development process .
While recent approaches within the history of technology have largely focused on technological artifacts and systems as cultural or political objects , this project examines the history of post-World War II industrialization with particular attention to how these objects manifest evolving relationships between humans , nature , and technology .
In particular , it traces the development of France 's Rhone River since 1945 by examining the history of river management technologies .
Of central interest is how these technologies embodied , constituted , and prescribed shifting interactions between users of the Rhone , different uses , and the river itself .
Such a historical ecological view of technology allows scholars to explore the recent history of industrialization not only in terms of technical change or shifts in the organization of work and production , but also as a fundamental transformation in the way modern societies interact with the natural environment .
Complementing earlier approaches in science and technology studies that have centered on the idea of systems or networks , this project focuses on the interrelated processes of technological development , environmental management , and state building in France since World War II .
Analyzing the technological artifacts built on the Rhone since 1945 illuminates larger transitions within not only river management technologies , but also the relationship between humans , nature , technology , and the state in contemporary France .
Over the second half of the twentieth century , the Rhone was a literal site for debates between French engineers , bureaucrats , writers , and citizens over the proper balance of industry and agriculture ; hydroelectric and nuclear energy ; urban and rural spaces ; development and environmental preservation ; and if the Rhone should serve regional , national , or international interests .
These groups also considered the proper role of the state in pursuing these different , and often competing , objectives .
At its core , then , the development of the Rhone manifests conflicts over the ideal environmental and technological basis of the nation and national identity .
This case study will , therefore , be of interest to historians of technology , scholars in technology studies , and environmental historians while its methodological and theoretical contributions also speak to the broader community of science and technology studies .
This proposal will permit travel to France for two months during the summer of 2003 to conduct essential new research in relevant archival collections in France , including Paris , Lyon , and Nimes as well as municipal and departmental archives in southeastern France .
Documents in these collections will help to analyze and develop such themes as shifting political , economic , and institutional objectives for the Rhone ; technical designs of specific projects ; conflicts between different groups within the state , between state agencies and users , and among users ; and responses by local communities to these projects .
This new research will lead to a book , published articles , conference presentations , and invited talks .
Information and communication technology ( ICT ) jobs are the fastest growing forms of employment in the global economy .
While the largest proportion of jobs are low status services , many scholars and policy makers argue this technology is the solution for global unemployment , especially for women .
Many development projects sponsored by organizations like the United Nations and World Bank center around ICTs .
Critics argue that these ICTs are responsible for the rise of new global sweatshops , which are dominated heavily by women in the South .
This project seeks to assess the potential of such development projects , and whether these new technologies are empowering or disadvantageous for women in the global South .
The research is based on case studies of call centers , which provide customer service agents for corporations in the North .
By the year 2008 , these call centers are projected to hire 18 million workers , most of them female .
This relatively new workforce , emerging largely in the last five years , is almost completely unexplored academically .
This project intends to fill this gap , focusing on India where the growth of the global IT workforce has been especially dramatic .
Through on-site fieldwork in New Delhi , the investigator will study three call centers , including interviews with 300 workers , as well as industry , governmental , and non-governmental association leaders .
The evidence will be used to adjudicate between competing perspectives on this phenomenon a modernization paradigm that sees technology as gender neutral , or else beneficial for women ; a critical or feminist paradigm that sees technology as disadvantageous for women ; and an organizational paradigm that sees size and structure as mediating factors which vary outcomes in different corporate settings .
In addition , this study assesses competing theories of global culture in ICTs , by asking whether the requirement for Indian workers to pose as Americans in calls to the U.S. results in assimilation or disjuncture in their sense of national and ethnic identity .
Thus , this study advances scholarly literatures in many areas , including technology , gender , development , stratification , work , race and ethnicity , globalization , and business management .
This project contributes to enhancing equity in use of information technology , especially for women in Southern countries like India .
It informs organizational policy and practice involving technology .
The broader impact includes training opportunities for students , expanding opportunities for women faculty in science , and improving the infrastructure of scholarly networks between the U.S. and India ( through collaboration with a university in New Delhi ) .
This project will also contribute to U.S. policy research on the gender digital divide within the information technology workforce , for government bodies like the National Coordination Office for Information Technology Research and Development , as well to international policy for ICT development programs of the United Nations and World Bank .
0238615McKayA multidisciplinary and multinational research group working on board a New Zealand ship and led by Dr. Philip Boyd of University of Otago , New Zealand , will seek to gain a better understanding of the role of iron in the structure and function of the ecosystems of the Southern Ocean .
This award supports Dr. Robert McKay of Bowling Green State University to participate in this field research as the lead Principal Investigator for a group of three U.S. scientists and a graduate student involved in the same research cruise and supported by separate grants .
His U.S. co-Principal Investigators and their award numbers are Steven Wilhelm of the University of Tennessee at Knoxville ( 0240092 ) and David Hutchins of the University of Delaware ( 0236987 ) .
The specific research foci of the three U.S. scientists differ .
Dr. McKay will measure diagnostic indicators of iron limitation such as the ratio of flavodoxin to ferrodoxin .
Dr. Wilhelm and Dr. McKay will evaluate degrees of iron stress in the phytoplankton community using state-of-the-art prokaryotic bioreporter constructs .
Dr. Hutchins will simulate changes in diapycnal iron inputs using a novel shipboard natural community chemostat system .
He will also apply a newly developed trace metal clean surface wash method to measure scavenged and interior pools of particulate iron.The micronutrient iron limits phytoplankton growth and photosynthesis over most of the large Southern Ocean surrounding Antarctica .
This in turn affects the global carbon cycle.Most studies of iron in the ocean have come from adding artificially high levels and monitoring the changes seen in the affected body of water .
Very little is known about the major pools , fluxes and biogeochemical pathways of this limiting nutrient under unperturbed natural conditions .
This research effort will employ several novel techniques to assess microbial impacts on and reactions to iron levels in a natural oceanic environment .
This will be a significant contribution to the ability to model the natural marine iron cycle in an important region of the world 's ocean .
If successful , the innovative techniques employed will have wide value to other marine scientists .
It will have educational impacts for the US graduate student who will participate and for students of the US investigators who will learn about the work .
Marine bacterioplankton are central and quantitatively significant components of marine ecosystems ; their role looms large in determining the capacity of oceanic systems to sequester atmospheric CO2 into the deep ocean .
Current models constructed to examine these questions consider marine bacterioplankton as a monolithically active compartment .
This is in large part due to the lack of understanding regarding whether specific phylogenetic or physiologically identifiable groups of bacteria have distinct conditions for optimal growth , or whether diverse groups of bacterioplankton do in fact respond uniformly to changing environmental conditions , as the models assume .
Flow cytometric enumeration of marine bacterioplankton using nucleic-acid specific stains has shown the routine presence of two distinct clusters of bacterial cells based on cell-specific nucleic acid ( NA , i.e .
DNA and RNA ) content .
Opposing ideas have been proposed concerning these distinct clusters of bacteria 1 ) most bacterial activity is due to cells with higher nucleic acid content ( high-NA ) , while lower nucleic acid content cells ( low-NA ) are either slow-growing or dead , or 2 ) both high-NA and low-NA cells have similar biomass-specific rates of activity .
This research will focus on the high-NA and low-NA cells present in bacterial communities in the Oregon upwelling ecosystem .
Two alternative hypotheses will be examined Ho 1 .
High-NA and low-NA bacterial cells are composed of phylogenetically distinct bacterial assemblages that show differences in physiological activity .
This would be the case if high NA and low-NA cells tend to fall into separate assemblages of cells that are adapted to different growth strategies .
Ho 2- High-NA and low-NA cells tend to have similar phylogenetic compositions and similar biomass-specific rates of activity .
The approach will involve flow cytometric enumeration and sorting of bacteria based on cell-specific nucleic acid or protein content .
Sorted bacteria will be assayed for cell-specific activity via prior labeling with radioactive substrates , and assayed for phylogenetic diversity via PCR amplification of DNA extracted from sorted cells followed by DGGE analysis , sequencing of selected gel bands , and phylogenetic identification .
At the same time , radiolabeled subsamples will be collected on filters and analyzed by combined microautoradiography and fluorescence in situ hybridization ( FISH ) using domain-specific probes , as well as more specific probes , in order to determine the relative contribution of substrate-active phylogenetic groups to total bacterial abundance .
A main goal of the project is to put the results in ecological context , i.e .
to relate variability in activity and diversity among high-NA and low-NA bacterioplankton to environmental parameters likely to affect the growth of marine bacteria ( e.g .
potential bottom-up controls such as phytoplankton biomass and riverine DOC influx ) .
Intellectual merit This research project will address the linkages between physiological and phylogenetic diversity in marine bacterioplankton , and how such linkages might affect bacterial processing of organic matter in marine systems .
The results would be a significant step in understanding the role of specific phylogenetic components of the bacterioplankton community in global biogeochemical cycles and carbon flux .
Broader impacts This project will support the Ph.D. thesis research of a female graduate student and provide the student with post-doctoral training ; it will also enhance the teaching efforts of the P.I..s and support the common use Flow Cytometry Facility and molecular genetics capabilities in the College of Oceanography and Atmospheric Sciences .
The rapidly growing body of scientific literature in fields such as semi-classical mechanics , mesoscopic physics , and quantum chaos is raising new questions about the relationship between classical and quantum mechanics .
Far from being obsolete , the concepts of classical mechanics are playing a central role in discovering new phenomena and coming to a deeper understanding of quantum theory .
Despite these important developments there still does not exist a book in the history and philosophy of science literature devoted to an examination of the relationship between these two theories .
The objective of this research is to produce such a book .
This project begins with the realization that the traditional frameworks for understanding intertheoretic relations are inadequate .
The complex and subtle relationship between classical and quantum mechanics is not captured by the well-known models of reductionism , pluralism , nor the classical limit .
In searching for a new framework , Bokulich turns to the history of physics , examining how the founders of quantum theory viewed the relationship of that theory to classical mechanics .
Her work will provide an important contribution to the history of physics literature by showing how Niels Bohr , Werner Heisenberg , and Paul Dirac , all members of the so-called Copenhagen interpretation , each had a distinctive philosophy of the relationship between classical and quantum mechanics .
Of these three views she proposes that Dirac 's philosophy of intertheoretic relations provides the best framework for understanding recent developments in quantization and semiclassical mechanics .
Building on this historical work , Bokulich considers how recent developments in are a continuation of Dirac 's program to make precise the similarities between the mathematical structures of classical and quantum mechanics .
Her investigation will provide a new and important testing ground for the philosophical view known as structural realism .
To further build her case , Bokulich next turns to an examination of semiclassical theory and its application in the field of quantum chaos .
She focuses her investigation on a particular area of experimental research in which classical orbits are being used not only to investigate , but to explain causally , quantum phenomena .
These experiments raise pressing philosophical questions about the epistemological status of classical concepts in quantum theory .
These two case studies , quantization and quantum chaos , provide examples of scientific discoveries that come only through a careful study of the relationship between classical and quantum mechanics .
Bokulich contends that these two case studies will also shed new light on the traditional philosophical problems of reductionism and realism .
As an interdisciplinary work that integrates historical , philosophical , and scientific perspectives , Bokulich 's book will help further the fruitful dialogue between researchers in these diverse fields .
This individual investigator award supports a systematic effort to elucidate underlying physics of the 4d and 5d transition metal oxides .
These systems are a new class of materials characterized by strong coupling between different degrees of freedom and the coexistence of different kinds of ordering .
Recent discoveries show a glimpse of intriguing physical properties of 4d-electron based ruthenates ( Sr , Ca ) ( n+1 ) Ru ( n ) O ( 3n+1 ) and 5d-electron based iridates Sr ( n+1 ) Ir ( n ) O ( 3n+1 ) , and provide strong motivation for a thorough investigation .
These layered materials exhibit an astonishing dimensionality-dependence of physical properties and a wide array of exotic phenomena including coexistence of fermion-quasiparticle and nonmetallic characteristics , inter-plane tunneling magnetoresistance , colossal magnetoresistance ( CMR ) , drastically different anisotropies of the CMR and magnetization , p-wave superconductivity , metamagnetism , diamagnetism in an insulating state , etc .
These phenomena reflect new physics , and it is this new physics that needs to be thoroughly studied .
The planned program includes single crystal growth ( both flux and floating zone methods ) and experimental studies of thermal , electronic , magnetic and structural properties of these materials as a function of temperature , chemical doping , magnetic field and pressure .
Graduate students involved in the research will receive rigorous training with an emphasis on materials developments , synthesis , and characterizations .
This type of training in our graduate education is particularly needed nowadays as the lack of scientists who specialize in both developing new materials and growing single crystals has already hindered advancements in condensed matter physics in the US .
This individual investigator award supports a systematic effort to elucidate underlying physics of the 4d and 5d transition metal oxides , which are by and large an uncharted territory rich with novel physical phenomena that can not be explained through our conventional understanding .
Recent discoveries show a glimpse of intriguing physical properties of 4d-electron based ruthenates and 5d-electron based iridates , and provide strong motivation for a thorough investigation .
These layered materials exhibit an astonishing dimensionality-dependence of physical properties and a wide array of exotic phenomena including novel superconductivity and the coexistence of different kinds of ordering , which are conventionally expected to exclude each other , etc .
These phenomena largely defy conventional wisdom and reflect new physics , and it is this new physics that needs to be thoroughly studied .
The planned program includes materials synthesis and experimental studies of thermal , electronic , magnetic and structural properties of this class of materials as a function of temperature , chemical substitution , magnetic field and pressure .
Graduate students involved in the research will receive rigorous training with an emphasis on materials developments , synthesis , and characterizations .
This type of training in our graduate education is particularly needed nowadays as the lack of scientists who specialize in both developing new materials and growing single crystals has already hindered advancements in condensed matter physics in the United States .
PROJECT ABSTRACTSES 0240347Food Safety Standards , Scientific Knowledge , and the Moral Economy of MeatpackingElizabeth Dunn , University of ColoradoIn July , 2002 , the ConAgra meatpacking plant in Greeley , Colorado , recalled 19 million pounds of beef potentially contaminated with E.coli .
Journalists wrote vivid prose about the stench of the feedlots and the horrifying conditions in the packing plant , but this was only one of many recent , widely publicized global meatpacking disasters .
In recent years , thousands of cattle with Mad Cow disease have been destroyed ; hundreds of thousands of sheep and pigs with Foot and Mouth disease have been slaughtered ; and widespread discussion has arisen about meat irradiation , the labeling of organic meats , and the safety of meat imports .
All of these controversies hinge on the creation and enforcement of standards for food production.But what exactly do standards regulate ?
The proposed research investigates standards not simply as technical rules but as aspects of a moral economy that governs industrial sectors , firms , and people ( Thompson 1971 , Busch 2000 ) .
How do national or global standards shape local places ?
The PI has developed a standards chain methodology to trace standards from their production in technical committees , through the global and national institutions that introduce and enforce them , down to the people who make their livelihoods from meat .
This research will compare the deployment of scientific knowledge in two standards-writing bodies Codex Alimentarius and the US Department of Agriculture .
It will also examine how new regulations shape meat production in Poland and the United States and explore their effects on the people of two meatpacking towns Greeley , Colorado , and Sanok , Poland.Standardization is a crucial means of governance in the world economy .
Yet , we know very little about how the ostensibly objective and scientific knowledge employed in the organizations that produce standards are entwined with the locally specific interests of the people who , in producing food , are coerced or entrusted to use standards .
How are the farmers , firms , and workers who produce and process food represented in the process of creating standards ? Given the institutional constraints firms face , how do they respond to those standards ?
The stakes in standardization are not trivial a miniscule change in a single standard might force smaller processors and farmers out of business ( Gmyrek 2001 ) , cost larger producers millions of dollars in lost revenue ( Wilson and Otsuki 2001 ) , or restructure sectors of the food system along industrial lines ( Busch 1997 , Flynn et .
al .
1994 ) .Investigating standards as elements of a moral economy means asking not only how they shape large-scale economies but also how they transform the micropractices of the workplace .
How do people such as Poland 's small-hold farmers or Greeley 's immigrant meatpackers perceive and experience these global forms of regulation ?
What cultural resources do they use to modify , resist or circumvent regulation ( Scott 1998 ) ?
By comparing Poland , which was shaped by state socialism , with the United States , which has faced consolidation of capitalist agribusiness , the research asks how standards interact with regimes of accumulation , or large- scale patterns of economic institutions , and the mode of social regulation , or the social norms , values , and habits that govern individuals , economic actions .
The broader impacts of this research include contributions to the public debate over food safety ( Turner 2001 ) and suggestions of ways to include underrepresented groups such as Polish farmers or Mexican immigrant workers in the standards-writing process .
The research will be shared with standards producers in the hope that it will also introduce into public policy an awareness of the wider social impacts of standardization .
A grant has been awarded to Dr. Gelli of the University of California at Davis , to study how fungal cells use calcium channels to proliferate and survive within the host environment .
Like all eukaryotic cells , fungal cells translate changes in their environment into physiological responses and adaptations through cell signaling events .
Dr. Gelli proposes that calcium channels in fungal cells initiate a calcium-dependent signaling pathway by responding to particular host environmental conditions .
Once activated the calcium-dependent signaling cascade promotes fungal proliferation , growth and cellular morphogenesis .
The ultimate goal is to understand how calcium channels function within signaling pathways to promote fungal proliferation and growth within the host .
It is anticipated that this research will provide the knowledge to alter channel function or regulation as a means to prevent fungal proliferation and ultimately prevent fungal survival.The facultative fungus , Cryptococcus neoformans will be used as the model organism in this research since this fungus offers a particularly unique opportunity to examine the role of calcium channels in stimulus-response coupling in the fungal-host relationship .
Since C. neoformans is phylogenetically at the junction between some of the most destructive plant pathogens ( such as smuts or rusts ) , and economically important food sources ( mushrooms ) within the Basidiomycota , the proposed research will impact the field of agriculture .
Also since calcium channels in fungi have never been characterized at the level of detail proposed here , it is anticipated that this project will likely produce the first mechanistic insight in calcium channel activity in the entire fungal kingdom .
This kind of insight will be useful to all researchers who study calcium channels in other fungi and in animals .
In addition , the development of robust procedures for applying electrophysiology to fungal cells will benefit these same researchers .
Additionally , Dr. Gelli is involved in an outreach program to attract high school students into the laboratory .
This will be a great opportunity to get many of these students involved so that they can see first hand the various aspects of fungal physiology .
ABSTRACTThe project will support a workshop , held by the American Mathematical Society , in partnership with a number of colleges and universities , professional organizations , and individual experts , on the mentoring and nurturing of students in mathematics .
The goal is to build awareness in the mathematics community that programs with the identified characteristics can enhance student academic experiences , improving student performance as well as aiding in attracting and retaining students.The workshop agenda is to identify and showcase effective mentoring methods to improve attraction and retention of underrepresented minorities in mathematics , utilizing expertise form institutions that have demonstrated successful mentoring and nurturing .
The workshop will include programs directed toward undergraduate , graduate and post-doctoral students .
By identifying successful practices and disseminating these findings by way of the AMS website and other professional society communications , and through participating institutions , the PI anticipates that mathematics departments will be motivated to initiate programs with mentoring components , which is expected to improve departmental environment .
This project supports dissertation research to investigate the interweaving of technology and politics in the early stages of the Soviet civilian nuclear program .
It will analyze the technological , social , economic and political factors that influenced the choice of particular reactor types , and show how these design choices set the parameters for further technological developments .
First , it will explore the history of the two major Soviet reactor types and attempt to unpack the technological and political discussions surrounding the decision to adopt these types as standard reactors for the Soviet civilian nuclear industry .
It will then identify these reactors ' techno politics , i.e. , how reactor designers , engineers , and nuclear power plant operators appropriated particular versions of this history , and how scientific and technological success was deployed as a powerful tool for political legitimacy .
The project aims at reconstructing how the contingent , controversial , and sometimes arbitrary sets of decisions concerning reactor designs were transformed into linear , logically developing narratives of technological progress .
In order to understand the state endorsed representations of nuclear power in relation to unofficial stories , it will combine archival documents relating to the early stages of the Soviet civilian nuclear program with in-depth interviews of reactor designers and nuclear power plant operators .
The social history of Soviet reactor design is a unique site to understand decision-making processes at the interface between science , technology , and the state .
It intends to clarify the connections between technological choices and political agendas by showing how technological artifacts like nuclear reactors served as powerful rhetorical resources to challenge or sustain the political and social order .
This project can contribute to our understanding of contemporary notions of reactor safety , and it can illuminate the quandaries of a state-enacted popularization of science and technology .
ABSTRACTOCE-0240787In this research project , scientists at the University of Hawaii will study the rate of nitrous oxide ( N2O ) formation in seawater and determine how production rate relates to the release of N2O to the overlying atmosphere in the eastern tropical North Pacific Ocean , the subarctic Pacific Ocean and in the Bering Sea .
The experiments will identify the relative importance of the microbiological pathways by which N2O is produced in diverse marine environments .
This study will take advantage of several new analytical innovations to refine our understanding of N2O cycling in the eastern tropical North Pacific and to extend our knowledge of N2O sources and sinks to the subarctic Pacific and the Bering Sea .
The research team will take advantage of a rare opportunity to join already-funded research cruises to explore large regions of the ocean that are at once poorly understood but also very quantitatively significant in the workings of the global nitrogen cycle .
In the proposed investigation the PIs will examine interactions and feedbacks among five fundamental components of the Arctic environment horizontally transported heat and moisture , cloud properties , surface temperature , net precipitation , and surface radiation fluxes .
Conventional meteorological data are sparse over the Arctic Ocean , and other than surface pressure fields and temperatures there is relatively little information with which to investigate these issues in a pan-Arctic sense .
Newly available satellite-derived data sets from the NOAA/NASA Pathfinder Program offer an unprecedented opportunity to observe the Arctic climate by providing measurements of atmospheric quantities spanning two decades .
Preliminary calculations using these data indicate that significant , cohesive changes have occurred in surface temperature , advection patterns , and cloud properties , but how are they related to each other ?
How do these apparent trends relate to changes in the surface radiation balance ?
Can the observed trends be explained by large-scale atmospheric circulation features , such as the Arctic Oscillation , North Atlantic Oscillation , North Pacific Oscillation , or others ?
These are the questions the PI 's expect to address in this investigation .
The proposed study speaks directly to three of the four hypotheses targeted by the new multiagency initiative called the Study of Environmental Arctic Change ( SEARCH ) 1 ) Unaami ( the name given to the suite of observed pan-Arctic changes ) is related to the Arctic Oscillation , 2 ) Unaami is a component of climate change , and 3 ) Feedbacks among the ocean , land , ice and the atmosphere are critical to Unaami .
Using two newly-available , 20-year , satellite-derived data sets in combination with surface observations , the PI 's will diagnose patterns of and interactions among change in transported heat and moisture , cloud properties , surface temperature , net precipitation , and surface radiation fluxes , and test the hypothesis that these patterns are interrelated and aligned with large-scale circulation features in the atmosphere .
The broader impacts of this activity are 1 ) to contribute toward understanding and predicting global climate processes and change , 2 ) to involve graduate students in the research , and 3 ) to provide material to be included in undergraduate course material for classes in remote sensing and cryospheric processes .
In June of 2003 the World Archaeological Congress ( WAC ) will hold its first full international Congress in North America in Washington D.C. WAC 5 will bring together hundreds of scholars , Indigenous Peoples , and others genuinely interested in the past to promote the exchange of the results of archaeological research ; professional training and public education for disadvantaged nations , groups , Indigenous groups and First Nations peoples ; and the conservation of archaeological sites .
The Congress is expected to attract about 1100 people who will meet together for five days , attending approximately 800 presentations from as many as 70 different countries .
The National Science Foundation will support attendance at the congress by 5 Third World scholars and Indigenous People .
WAC 5 is being held in partnership with the Smithsonian Institution 's National Museum of Natural History , and National Museum of the American Indian and in collaboration with the Getty Conservation Institute .
Supporters of WAC 5 include US National Park Service , Archeology and Ethnography Program , US Dept of Agriculture , Natural Resources Conservation Service , Flinders University , South Australia , American University , Library of Congress , Society for American Archaeology , and the US Bureau of Land Management.The Congress will focus on three major issues of international importance to archaeology1 .
programmatic/policy issues concerning future directions in the practice of global archaeology.2 .
practical/ technical knowledge to increase self-reliance and responsibility in protecting sites , artifacts and intellectual property.3 .
theoretical frontiers and research results with relevance across national boundaries.WAC 5 will contribute to advancing knowledge and understanding in archaeology and it will have broader impacts on the world .
WAC congresses have been unique in their ability to bring together international researchers for the sharing of research results , the forging of theoretical advances , and the development of archaeological methods .
They have facilitated international cooperation on issues of heritage management , the conservation of archaeological sites , and on relations between archaeologists and indigenous peoples .
WAC 5 will continue this tradition by bringing together archaeologists and Indigenous People from around the world in a structured program to advance knowledge and understanding in archaeology .
The Congress will also include public programs , workshops on the curation and conservation of archaeological materials , and symposiums on heritage management designed to promote teaching , training , and learning and to develop international infrastructure for networks and partnerships on these themes .
WAC 5 will help broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in archaeology .
The governance structure of WAC gives Third World Scholars and Indigenous people a prominent role in the organization .
Third World Scholars and Indigenous people have made up a third to a half of the participants in previous congresses .
WAC 5 can only achieve these goals with the participation of many people from underdeveloped countries and Indigenous People who can not afford the high travel costs to Washington D.C .
Recent large-displacement experiments with simulated gouge indicate that velocity-dependence of gouge friction evolves to , and out of velocity weakening behavior , dependent upon cumulative slip history .
Such rate-dependence transitions appear to coincide with certain shear localization and delocalization microstructures .
Do the microstructures appear and disappear in a systematic way with cumulative displacement ?
The PI 's propose to investigate the question through specific models with built-in tendency for shear localization and recurrent delocalization .
In one model the state of gouge is determined by interaction of shear bands and surfaces at the scale of gouge thickness , in another the observed rate-dependence transitions result directly from grain-scale processes .
They will investigate the validity of the models in both simulated and natural fault gouge .
Simulated gouge samples will be produced by a series of rotary shear experiments ; natural gouges will be collected from previously studied San Gabriel andPunchbowl fault outcrops in southern California .
The rate-and state-dependent friction laws are to a large extent empirical expressions of the processes of cataclasis , healing , and development of internal structures in gouge .
Microstructural parameters known to control these processes include particle size , particle size distribution , gouge layer thickness , porosity , and gouge fabrics .
The coupling between microstructural and mechanical analysis is weak due to difficulties in working with randomness , variability , and discontinuity that is inherent in brittle deformation microstructures .
Do cataclasticmicrostructures offer significantly more information than have been acquired so far by traditional methods ?
The PI 's propose to use digital image techniques , which allow matrix-type manipulations of image data and application of statistical , massive and sequential data analyses .
They believe that the project has clear implications for the physical definition of the evolution laws in friction constitutive equations , laboratory-to-field scaling relations , and computer simulation of gouge evolution .
Furthermore , large-scale fault mechanics investigations ( e.g .
SAFOD ) are expected to benefit from the portability and efficiency of digital image techniques that will be developed by this project .
EAR-0229260WeidnerThe Earth is a dynamic body , constantly evolving , changing the shapes of oceans , building mountains .
Our understanding of these phenomena includes a recognition of the plastic behavior of minerals at high temperature .
Plate tectonics asserts that stable surface plates are mechanically isolated from the deep Earth .
Thermal evolutionary models transport heat by vertical flow of minerals .
The rebound from glaciers is testimony to the viscous flow beneath .
This is a proposal to study the effects of pressure on the plastic character of the major minerals of the Earth 's mantle .
While we have vastly improved our understanding of the flow properties of minerals over the past several years , the effects of pressure are still poorly constrained .
Estimates of activation volume for olivine flow in the power law creep regime give rise to an uncertainty in viscosity at the base of the lithosphere of 1000 fold .
This uncertainty is greater that the total effect of water content or partial melting .
Furthermore , the flow characteristics of the high-pressure forms of olivine , the phases that control flow in the deep Earth , are virtually unknown.The investigators have been developing new tools capable of attacking this problem .
Using synchrotron x-ray sources , it is possible to measure both diffraction spectra and direct images of samples in a multi-anvil press while the sample is at high pressure and temperature .
They can now determine the stress field from the x-ray diffraction signal and strain from shadow-graph images .
One complete data collection cycle takes about three minutes .
Thus , time resolution of 200 seconds is possible and time derivatives of these parameters can be obtained .
Stress accuracy is a few tens of MPa , and strain rates of 10-7 s-1 can be resolved .
The investigators have demonstrated that they can create a stress field in the sample during each of several heating/compression cycles .
Thus , texture and defect structures can equilibrate during the experiment.With this award , the researchers will investigate the flow properties of olivine , wadsleyite , ringwoodite , garnet , and perovskite at high pressure .
They will synthesize the samples in the high-pressure laboratory at Stony Brook , and will use the synchrotrons at Brookhaven National Labs and at Argonne National Labs for the rheology study .
Results will be interpreted in terms of their implications on deep focus earthquakes and mantle viscosity structure .
-- Ducea and Chesley EAR-0229470 There is strong evidence that major continental magmatic arcs are being built in episodic flare-ups separated by periods of magmatic quiescence , although the mechanisms responsible for the high magmatic fluxes are not resolved .
Moreover , flare- up events appears to be fueled by a mafic input , thought to be largely derived from continental lithospheric mantle .
This requires the existence of a mantle lithosphere an order of magnitude thicker than allowed by observations in mantle wedges and tectonic models .
However , most of this evidence comes from subordinate mafic rocks found in shallow exposures of batholithic terranes .
Either the voluminous mafic input to the arc lower crust is not ( predominantly ) from the lithospheric mantle during high magmatic fluxes , or if it is , we need to revise our thinking regarding the dynamics of subduction beneath continents and the ability of continental lids to episodically feed melt-fertile mass to the mantle wedge .
These issues will be addressed in a petrologic study of mafic rocks from a mid-crustal arc exposure in the Big Sur area of the Santa Lucia Mountains , central coastal California .
The basement rocks exposed there represent a tilted exposure of a magmatic arc representing paleo-depths ranging from 25 km to 10 km .
At about 25 km beneath the arc there is a transition from large intrusions of tonalite to granodiorite composition separated by steeply dipping screens typical of the Sierra Nevada batholith to near horizontal , foliated gneissic rocks with numerous mafic intrusions .
Mafic intrusions , now either amphibolites or granulites , are abundant at this level , where they stalled due to buoyancy reasons .
Our mapping , petrographic , chemical and isotopic results will be used to resolve crustal vs. sub-crustal , and lithospheric vs. asthenospheric reservoirs involved in continental arc magmatism and provide new constraints for the mechanisms of generation of large batholiths .
Recent reports indicate that secondary mathematics teachers are most effective when they have a deep understanding of the mathematics they teach , and that teachers trained in the United States generally do not possess this depth of knowledge .
In this proof of concept , the grantees address this problem by writing an innovative college-level mathematics textbook focusing on the secondary mathematics curriculum , and show that the use of this book by pre-service secondary mathematics teachers in a newly designed undergraduate course improves their knowledge of the mathematics they are teaching .
The intellectual merit of Improving Pre-service Mathematics Teachers ' Understanding of Fundamental Concepts in the Secondary Mathematics Curriculum is that it aims to improve the knowledge base of pre-service teachers allowing for an increase in the depth of their mathematics knowledge .
The intent is to produce a book ready for national dissemination that could be used in a wide variety of situations on both the undergraduate and graduate level , either as a main textbook or as a resource .
Roughly speaking , the book exhibits three main features First , coverage of carefully selected basic secondary mathematics topics ( many of which are not explored sufficiently in high school due to the rush to calculus ) ; second , an emphasis on connections between these topics ; and finally extensions of these topics to challenging college-level problems and projects .
The broader impact of Improving Pre-service Mathematics Teachers ' Understanding of Fundamental Concepts in the Secondary Mathematics Curriculum is realized through the development , testing , and revision of innovative materials through a collaboration of mathematics faculty , mathematics education faculty , and current high school teachers .
These materials serve as the basis for a textbook , a draft of which is completed and field tested by the end of the grant period .
At the same time , student knowledge is assessed via a variety of evaluation methods .
0229172 Huang The fate of antimicrobials in the environment will be investigated .
The oxidation of three classes of these materials ( those containing phenol , aniline or piperizine ) with manganese , iron , and aluminum oxides and with oxide-rich soils will be studied to identify susceptibility to oxidation .
Oxidation products , structure-activity relationships , reaction kinetics , mechanisms and pathways will be elucidated .
Goals .
The first research objective of this CAREER program is to develop a parallel tool to position nanoparticles and small components onto surfaces .
The strategy that will be developed is based on directed self-assembly ; it uses a patterned surface with areas ( receptors ) that interact with nanoparticle based device components .
The interaction driving the assembly process is based on electrostatic forces .
The central goal of the research is to demonstrate that nanotechnological devices can be assembled by the directed self-assembly of nanoparticle building blocks .
As a first device example the research will focus on the fabrication of a vertical flow field effect transistor that uses a silicon nanoparticle as channel element .
The specific CAREER objectives areTo develop a parallel tool that is based on directed self-assembly to position nanoparticles and small components on surfaces with sub 100 nm resolution .
To study the key factors and ultimate resolution in theory and experiment.To apply the developed tool to fabricate nanotechnological devices in general and a vertical flow FET in particular.To foster a cross-disciplinary education and outreach to a broad community .
Intellectual merits .
Nanoparticles can provide a variety of functions and are considered as building blocks for future nanotechnological devices .
Examples of such devices are single electron transistors , quantum-effect-based lasers , photonic bandgap materials , filters , and wave-guides .
Device prototypes have been realized using random particle deposition and single particle manipulation .
Such strategies are useful to fabricate and explore new device architectures ; however , their lag in yield and speed will have to be overcome in the future .
Fabrication strategies that are based on self-assembly and directed assembly may overcome these difficulties .
This program will advance the knowledge in the area of directed self-assembly .
The research will focus on electrostatic interactions because they are long-range and non-material specific ( any particle can be trapped ) .
The PI invented a parallel process to pattern charge at 100 nm resolution ( published in Science 2001 , see bibliography ) .
In a preliminary experiment , these charge patterns allowed to direct the assembly of nanoparticles from the gas phase and liquid phase .
These findings demonstrate that electrostatic forces resulting from surface charges or externally biased electrodes can be used to guide nanoparticles to specific locations on a substrate .
The investigator believes that such an electrostatically-directed self-assembly , because it is based on long-range electrostatic interactions , will give a significant advantage over other strategies that use protein recognition , DNA hybridization , hydrophobicity/hydrophilicity , and magnetic interaction .
The CAREER program lays down the ground work to accomplish the PI 's long term research goal , which is to use a variety of different short range and long range interactions to direct the assembly of small components and nanoparticles to fabricate functional devices in two- and three dimensions .
Broader impact .
It is difficult to overstate the broader impact of the research component of this CAREER pogram , if it proves successful .
For example , materials could be created as nanoparticles in the vapor or in solution , where they could be processed using well established methods .
The ability to localize particles and small components of arbitrary materials on arbitrary substrates could allow the merging of technologies based on otherwise incompatible materials .
Examples of applications include quantum electronic devices ( addressed in this program ) , integrated circuits on plastics or fabrics for wearable intelligence , and merged optical/electronic structures for optical off-chip and cross-chip communication .
Educational objectives .
The educational objectives of the CAREER program focuses on creating awareness and transmitting excitement about the PI 's research as well as exploratory , interdisciplinary research in general .
It emphasizes on the importance of providing continuous opportunities for student involvement throughout their academic careers .
Strongly influenced by the PI 's educational experiences , the educational approach includes the following key points 1 ) outreach to high school students and teachers , 2 ) undergraduate education , 3 ) undergraduate research , 4 ) graduate education , 5 ) graduate research , and 6 ) outreach to the general public.Societal implications .
Advances in nanoscience and nanotechnology promise to have major implications for health , wealth , and peace in the upcoming decades .
Knowledge in this field is growing worldwide , leading to fundamental scientific advances .
In turn , this will lead to dramatic changes in the ways that materials , devices , and systems are understood and create .
- after Mihail C. Roco .
This research is one element to advance knowledge .
It suggests a dramatic change in the way that devices and systems are created .
Navrotsky0229332This proposal funds the Thermochemistry Facility at UC Davis .
This facility has unique capabilities to measure enthalpies of formation in mineralogical systems .
This project emphasizes the thermochemistry of high-pressure perovskite phases relevant to the Earth 's lower mantle , of other lower pressure hydrous phases , and of rare earth - bearing geochemical systems .
In addition , it will provide the infrastructure support to allow visitors to perform calorimetric measurements relevant to a variety of mineralogical and geochemical problems .
WGBH Educational Foundation is requesting $ 1,261,934 , or 33 % of a total project budget of $ 3,835,236 , to produce 20 new shows and new outreach and Web activities for ZOOM .
Targeted to kids ages 8 to 11 , ZOOM is a daily , half-hour PBS series featuring an assortment of games , riddles , investigations , recipes and poems -- all based on materials sent in by its young viewers .
Uniquely by and for kids , ZOOM gives its viewers a chance to explore , experiment and share their creativity .
ZOOM 's science and math segments ( 30 % of each half-hour show ) give kids opportunities to explore scientific and mathematical ideas , concepts and phenomena .
The goals for Season VI are to ( 1 ) expand ZOOM 's engineering curriculum ; ( 2 ) develop two new content areas -- Sports Science , and Perception and Sensation ; ( 3 ) create new partnerships with FIRST LEGO League and Girl Scouts of USA ; and , ( 4 ) conduct summative evaluation to continue to gauge ZOOM 's effectiveness at teaching math and science to targeted audiences .
Outreach for the project will include print materials for kids , families and educators .
ZOOM-related activities at community-based organization include 590 ClubZOOM science afterschool programs and 21 ZOOMzone science museum exhibits .
The 2,400-page interactive web site is updated weekly .
ZOOM currently is carried by 170 public broadcasting stations and is viewed by close to 6 million children per week .
The program receives 24,000 letters and e-mails per week ; the web site attracts an average of 14,000 visitors per month .
DyarEAR-0229739The fugacities of hydrogen and oxygen in silicate melts limit the water concentration of melts , and hence are a major control of viscosity , explosivity , crystallization temperature , and order of crystallization of minerals .
Both H and O are key to the crystallization of hydrous minerals , and their abundance may drive magmas along calc-alkaline or tholeiitic differentiation paths .
The goal of this project is to assess the Fe3+/Fe2+ and H contents of felsic melts and their crystallization products , and to relate those contents to the fo2 and fH2O of the starting melt .
We plan to 1 ) measure the H concentrations in minerals and glasses from magmatic systems for which independent constraints on fH2O are available , using both synchrotron and conventional ( globar ) FTIR spectroscopy ; and 2 ) measure the Fe3+ contents of naturally-produced melts , feldspars , and coexisting oxide and ferromagnesian phases ( such as amphibole ) for which independent constraints on fO2 are available , using micro-XANES spectroscopy .
From these data , we can independently derive oxygen and hydrogen fugacity values from the measured Fe3+/SFe and compare these results to previously determined values .
Samples from the Bishop Tuff ( California ) , the Timber Mountain Tuff ( Nevada ) , Mt .
Erebus ( Antarctica ) , the Purico complex ( Chile ) , and the Katmai complex ( Alaska ) will be used in this study .
To associate oxygen and hydrogen fugacity values with measured Fe3+/SFe , we will use coexisting hydrous phases , either hornblende or biotite , for which experimental data are available that provide a calibration between Fe3+/SFe and H2O deficiency as a function of fH2 , T , and P. Because we will know H2O concentration from independent work on melt inclusions , and we will measure Fe3+/SFe , we will be able to calculate fH2 .
From the calculated fH2 and fH2O derived from water concentrations in melt inclusions , we will be able to calculate fO2 .
We also plan to compare our results to results with the oxygen barometers developed by Sugawara ( 2001 ) based on thermodynamic models to calculate oxygen fugacity in the crystallizing system .
KressEAR-0229871This study will calibrate a thermodynamic model for sulfur in silicate melts as a function of temperature , pressure , oxygen fugacity , sulfur fugacity and bulk melt composition .
The resulting model will be applicable to a wide range of problems in igneous petrology , volcanology , magmatic ore genesis , planetary geology , and metallurgy .
Two categories of experiments will be performed .
The first set will study a variety of silicate melt compositions in a controlled sulfur atmosphere at super-liquidus temperatures to calibrate a thermodynamic model for sulfur .
Results will be used to incorporate sulfur into Ghiorso and Sack 's ( 1995 ) MELTS model .
A second set of experiments will determine the partial molar volumes of sulfide liquid components in the system O-S-Fe-Ni-Cu .
These experiments will employ a modified single-bob Archimedian method to measure density .
Results will be used to calibrate a model for sulfur in silicate liquids at pressure .
DobrzhinetskayaEAR-0229666The recognition of microdiamonds within ultra-high pressure metamorphic rocks a decade ago initiated a revolution in the understanding of continental collision terranes .
Two concepts are known to explain the origin of such diamonds ( 1 ) crystallization from a supercritical COH fluid ; ( 2 ) crystallization from fluid-bearing alkaline-carbonate melt .
Traditionally , experimental attempts to replicate natural diamond formation have been based on synthesis in metal-carbon systems in a highly reduced environment .
Only recently has experimental modeling of natural diamonds at high P and T conditions been extended to the alkaline-carbonate-carbon system in the presence of H2O .
We have established experimentally that H2O is an active catalyst promoting diamond crystallization from graphite at high pressure and high temperature and that incubation time is dependent on metal ions in solution .
In particular , we find that Mg facilitates nucleation and Si does not .
This work will extend our work in diamond synthesis with a focus on diamond nucleation in the COH-SiO2 system at varying parameters such as pressure , temperature , time and oxygen fugacity to constrain the mechanism of diamond growth in quartzofeldspathic gneisses and quartzites from ultra-high pressure metamorphic terranes .
Experimental investigations related to diamond synthesis from supercritical COH fluid in the diamond stability field is a new but fast-growing research field of great importance for understanding of the mechanism of diamond crystallization within subducted rocks of continental affinity and may bring interesting application for industrial diamond synthesis .
Despite recent advances in understanding of the mechanical and thermal response ofcontinental lithosphere to collisional orogenesis , important controversies remain .
One of these centers on the role of large strike-slip faults during intracontinental deformation , and whether these structures 1 ) control the lateral 'escape ' of quasi-rigid blocks in response to continental convergence ( e.g. , Tapponnier et al. , 1982 ) , or 2 ) reflect the passive localization of strain in a pervasively deforming and shearing crust ( e.g. , England and Molnar , 1990 ) .
The models make very different predictions regarding the variation of displacement along strike-slip faults , the relationship of fault displacement to deformation of the surrounding crustal blocks , and the nature of accommodation of slip at the terminations of the faults .
In eastern Tibet , continuing debate over the nature of active deformation reflects , to a large degree , the limited number of rigorous geologic tests of these predictions.The Kunlun fault is a first-order structural feature in the central and eastern Tibetan Plateau , where it presents a key opportunity to test among competing hypotheses for the role of strike-slip faults in the active deformation of eastern Tibet .
Although Holocene slip rates appear to be uniform at ~11mm/yr along the central portion of the fault ( Van der Woerd et al. , 2000 ) , several observations suggest that significant left-lateral shear along the eastern Kunlun fault does not reach the margin of the Tibetan Plateau 1 ) the active trace of the fault on remote sensing ( e.g. , Tapponnier and Molnar , 1977 ) can not be distinguished east of ~102 E ; 2 ) field observations ( Kirby ) confirm that scarps associated with the Kunlun fault are not present east of this region ; and 3 ) geodetic surveys indicate that , at present , little resolvable left-lateral shear passes through the eastern margin of the plateau ( Chen et al. , 2000 ) .
Determining what happens to left-lateral shear along the easternmost portion of the Kunlun fault is critical if we are to understand its kinematic and dynamic role in deformation of eastern Tibet and more generally the role of strike-slip faults during intracontinental deformation.The PI 's propose to test several hypotheses regarding the mechanisms of transfer and/oraccommodation of displacement at the apparent termination of an intracontinental strike-slip fault ce Hypothesis 1 Displacement is transferred to kinematically linked , strike-slip faults thata .
transmit displacement across and beyond the plateau margin , orb .
transmit displacement to shortening structures at the plateau margin.ce Hypothesis 2 Displacement is absorbed by distributed shortening within the plateau resulting in crustal thickening.ce Hypothesis 3 Displacement represents passive rotation of faults in response to a diffuse , clockwise regional shear.Testing these hypotheses will focus on the following tasksce Determining Late Pleistocene-Holocene slip rates along the easternmost segment of the Kunlun fault , with special attention to potential variations along strike.ce Establishing the geometry , kinematics , and rates of displacement on candidate accommodation structures ( both within the plateau and at its margin ) .ce Assessing the magnitude and distribution of differential rock uplift and river incision in the Anyemaqen Shan ( the prime candidate for shortening within the plateau ) This study promises to bring a detailed chronologic perspective to bear on the nature ofaccommodation of strain at the terminations of large , intracontinental strike-slip faults .
The PI 's will document the presence or absence of displacement gradients present near the ends of such structures .
The study will define the relationship of fault displacement to regional deformation patterns and will determine some of the mechanisms by which displacement is transferred to other structures .
Finally , it will determine to what degree fault displacements are linked to deformation of the bounding blocks .
The combined results will yield critical new insights into the problem of extrusion versus rotation during continental deformation .
This project involves a grant for training in ethnographic research methods to the department of anthropology at Southern Methodist University .
The funds will be used over a period of five years to insure that Ph.D. students in social/cultural anthropology who take a specified course of study in scientific research design and methodology have fieldwork experience before they begin their Ph.D. research .
This activity is important to insure that the training of social scientists is as well-developed as possible , so that the new cohort of social researchers will be capable of advancing our knowledge of contemporary problems as well as of basic research issues .
Simons/KennerEAR-0229868/0229793Collaborative Research Interpreting High Resolution Geodetic Data with Viscoelastic ModelsAbstractThis project is a collaborative effort bridging the gap between modern datasets and modern modeling techniques , in an effort to improve our ability to elucidate rheological structure within active tectonic zones .
In particular , we will characterize the sensitivity of our estimates of lithospheric rheology to the spatial and temporal scale of available datasets .
We emphasize the role of model cycle-up/spin-up , variable earthquake repeat times , and realistic variations in rheology .
This effort will allow for the more effective use InSAR and GPS data , to constrain geologically reasonable models .
We will apply the lessons we learn through theoretical studies to specific , well-constrained study areas , including postseismic deformation following the Landers and Hector Mine earthquakes and post-rifting deformation in the Northern Volcanic Zone , Iceland .
The results and procedures developed during the course of this proposal will 1 ) help to minimize uncertainties associated with improper and/or geologically implausible modeling techniques , 2 ) allow quantitative comparison of rheological structures inferred by independent investigators , and 3 ) ultimately lead to more accurate estimates of rheological properties at depth , including associated uncertainties .
These inferences can then be used in subsequent secondary analyses , particularly those that would benefit from an explicit assessment of model and data induced uncertainties , such as studies of fault interaction , estimation of fault slip-rates from geodetic data for seismic hazard purposes , and time-dependent probabilistic seismic hazard assessments .
ShawEAR-0229834Geometrical and material heterogeneities in faults have long been viewed as a crucial feature affecting earthquake behavior .
More recently , the role of stress heterogeneities has begun to be recognized as a potentially central feature , particularly with the demonstration that stress heterogeneities alone already can produce a remarkably rich and complex set of earthquake-likebehaviors on uniform planar faults .
What is missing is an understanding of how the two types of heterogeneities , the static geometrical and material heterogeneities , and the dynamic stress heterogeneities , might combine and interact to produce even more realistic behavior .
Building from earlier work in which we successfully integrated physical models of complex fault systems with the elastodynmics of repeating events , we are working to continue this line of research of the interaction of geometrical and dynamical heterogeneities .
We are working to both further develop the theory , by further developing the modeling capability to extend from the scalar to the tensor case , and to further develop our ability to test the theory , by exploring the observable consequences .
Failure modes of sand and sandstone play an important role in construction of engineering structures , optimization of water resources and related contaminant remediation , production of oil and gas , well bore stability analyses , and earthquake hazard mitigations .
Two distinct failure modes are recognized in terms of their geometry and micromechanics sharp planar discontinuities and tabular zones of localized deformation .
The tabular zones of localized deformation include shear , compaction , and dilation bands and are the focus of this study .
Tabular failure structures in unconsolidated sand and sandstone from a variety of depositional , burial , and regional tectonic settings are mapped and sampled .
These samples are studied using thin-section petrography , scanning-electron microscopy , and X-ray computerized tomography to characterize the failure modes and the associated grain fracture and porosity variation .
The relationships between grain size , porosity , cementation , loading conditions , burial depth and deformation history on the failure processes are then established .
This study is designed to constrain the effect of the environmental and mechanical conditions on the natural failure modes of unconsolidated sand and sandstone by comparing them with those of experimentally derived constitutive laws and those predicted by mathematical and numerical models .
The ultimate objective of this study is to provide a predictive tool for the failure behavior of granular rock in various environments , which is so relevant to many societal issues .
Transpression occurs along 42 % of the San Andreas fault system .
Its influence onthe behavior of the transform fault is thus of first-order importance and may represent oneof the most important complications in developing a comprehensive understanding ofhow strike-slip faults and plate boundaries behave .
With this in mind , the PI 's propose acollaborative study that will systematically and quantitatively integrate geologicalconstraints on the manner in which transpressional deformation is accommodated atseveral sites along the San Andreas fault .
A functional understanding of transpression would make patterns of vertical deformation easy to predict where primary boundary conditions , such as the degree of plate motion obliquity and the mechanics of the main transform fault , are known .
However , the material properties of the San Andreas fault are debated , and considerable evidence suggests that secondary factors ( structural and lithologic heterogeneity , erosivity ) play a significant role in shaping the geologic response to transpression .
As a result , a general understanding of how transpressional plate motion becomes manifest as deformation in the crust has not been developed .
One of the PI 's objectives is to quantitatively evaluate the effects of external factors on deformation partitioning , so that we may ultimately evaluate models of transpressional deformation that are predicated on assumptions of the mechanical properties of the San Andreas fault .
Their approach will be to use the spatial and temporal distribution of vertical motion , manifested in bedrock uplift ( surface uplift + exhumation ) , as a representation of transpression .
They will combine thermochronologic constraints ( ( U-Th ) /He dating ) on the age and magnitude of exhumation with geomorphic and structural constraints on surface uplift , erosion , and the architecture of deformation that drives this bedrock uplift .
They will use these complementary techniques to determine how patterns of vertical motion are spatially distributed with respect to the San Andreas fault ( i.e .
near vs. far field ) and its obliquity to plate motion .
The PI 's objective is thus to develop a functional relationship between transpressive deformation and these key variables .
This will require developing controls on how the chronology of vertical motion relates to the emergence of transpression at each site as well as controls on the effects of independent boundary conditions ( e.g .
geological , structural , climatic ) along strike .
They will focus on four sites ( Carrizo Plain/Temblor Range , San Emigdio Mountains , northern San GabrielMountains , and Coachella Valley ) , each of which represents a major gap in understanding of transpression along the San Andreas fault .
The integrated results fromthese sites , when synthesized with previous studies , will provide the full range inboundary conditions and transpressive parameters needed to create specific tests ofdifferent models of transpressional deformation .
A key aspect of this proposal is the collaboration that will be employed in attaining our goal .
The PI 's have extensive knowledge of southern California geology and the analytical techniques to be employed .
Spotila was among the first to apply this type of integrated approach to understanding portions of the Transverse Ranges .
House has actively pursued new applications of the thermochronologic technique that will be employed in this study .
Brady provides a robust foundation in structural geology and geophysics that will link uplift estimates with individual structures .
Post-doctoral associate Niemi will add an additional expertise in Cenozoic stratigraphy , structural geology , and field mapping .
This number of PI 's will also enable us to begin work at all field sites concurrently and represents a science team strong enough to tackle this significant problem .
GardnerEAR-0229290Eruptions of basaltic and basaltic andesitic ( basic ) magma in subduction zones can vary in style between strombolian to intense sub-Plinian ( and rarely Plinian ) .
Why can subduction-zone basic magmas erupt in such dramatically different styles , as compared to Hawaiian eruptions ?
Is it because subduction-related magmas contain greater amounts of gas , or are their ascent paths or ascent rates more conducive to explosive eruptions ?
This study seeks to answer those questions by investigating the influences that gas content , storage , ascent , and degassing have on the eruptive style of basic magma in subduction zones .
The investigators ' study focuses on three key eruptions of basic magma from the Aleutian volcanic arc Shishaldin volcano in 1999 , Okmok volcano in 1997 , and Westdahl volcano in 1991-92 .
Those eruptions are ideal for this study because they varied greatly in eruptive style ( strombolian , fire fountain , and sub-Plinian ) , including during each eruption .
In addition , all three eruptions were monitored with seismic and geodetic measurements , which place important constraints on magma motion and eruptive character .
The investigators propose to examine influences on eruptive style in three related tasks .
Task 1 will define textural differences ( both crystals and vesicles ) between the three eruptions and between different phases of the eruptions .
Task 2 will define pre-eruptive gas contents and pre-eruptive storage conditions of the three magmas , with a combination of glass inclusion measurements and experimental petrologic work .
Task 3 will define the relationship between decompression ( ascent ) rate and textural differences in the resulting products , through a series of experimental petrologic work .
Results from the three tasks , combined with the existing geophysical constraints on the eruptions , will allow the investigation of the gas contents , storage , ascent , degassing , and eruption of basic magma in the Aleutians .
Experiments will be performed in the Experimental Petrology Laboratory at the University of Alaska Fairbanks , and all products will be analyzed in the Advanced Instrumentation Laboratory at the University of Alaska Fairbanks .
Microbes and their products have important uses in forensics .
Diatoms have been used to identify where drowning victims went into the water and PCR tests have established paternity and relationships between crime victims and alleged perpetrators .
New technologies , like PCR and genome sequencing , could be used to establish the origin of an infectious disease outbreak , whether natural or due to intentional human intervention ( bioterrorism ) .
Questions of how to interpret molecular data should not wait until case law determines their validity .
For any new technology to be accepted , it is first important to determine what standards should be applied .
Knowledge of the genome sequences of Bacillis anthracis ( the cause of anthrax ) and other pathogens on the Center for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) list of potential bioterrorism agents must be augmented by knowledge of how this information can best be used .
While there are well-established criteria for evaluating and interpreting the results of such classical methods as cultivation or serological testing , no similar criteria have been developed for the new molecular methods .
This colloquium will 1 ) consider the use of microbial forensics in responses to disease outbreaks ( including bioterrorist attacks on human populations or agriculture ) ; 2 ) assess when and under what conditions new molecular techniques might be appropriate and whether they could be used in conjunction with more traditional approaches ; 3 ) determine how genome sequences and other molecular data can be best used and interpreted ; 4 ) suggest which standards can be defined and which can not ; and 5 ) identify potential problems and areas that need to be addressed experimentally so that criteria may be defined.The American Academy of Microbiology , the honorific leadership group of the American Society for Microbiology , will convene a colloquium June 6-9 , 2002 , in Burlington , Vermont .
The colloquium will bring together 25-30 interdisciplinary , expert scientists representing evolutionary microbiology , ecology , genomics , genetics , bioinformatics , forensics , chemistry , and clinical microbiology for structured deliberation on issues in microbial forensics .
Participants will consider several theoretical scenarios and survey current molecular technologies , including genome sequencing , with a view to recommending standards for evaluation and validation of the data these technologies produce .
The colloquium will produce the intellectual material for a published report with unbiased statements of the issues and practical recommendations for the future .
The stability of the marine West Antarctic Ice Sheet ( WAIS ) remains an important , unresolved problem for predicting future sea level change .
Recent studies indicate that the mass balance of the ice sheet today may be negative or positive .
The apparent differences may stem in part from short-term fluctuations in flow .
By comparison , geologic observations provide evidence of behavior over much longer time scales .
Recent work involving glacial-geologic mapping , dating and ice-penetrating radar surveys suggests that deglaciation of both the Ross Sea Embayment and coastal Marie Byrd Land continued into the late Holocene , and leaves open the possibility of ongoing deglaciation and grounding-line retreat .
However , previous work in the Ross Sea Embayment was based on data from just three locations that are all far to the north of the present grounding line .
Additional data from farther south in the Ross Sea Embayment are needed to investigate whether recession has ended , or if the rate and pattern of deglaciation inferred from our previous study still apply to the present grounding line .
This award provides support to reconstruct the evolution of Reedy Glacier , in the southern Transantarctic Mountains , since the Last Glacial Maximum ( LGM ) .
Because Reedy Glacier emerges from the mountains above the grounding line , its surface slope and elevation should record changes in thickness of grounded ice in the Ross Sea up to the present day .
The deglaciation chronology of Reedy Glacier therefore can indicate whether Holocene retreat of the WAIS ended thousands of years ago , or is still continuing at present .
This integrated glaciologic , glacial-geologic , and cosmogenic-isotope exposure- dating project will reconstruct past levels of Reedy Glacier .
Over two field seasons , moraines will be mapped , dated and correlated at sites along the length of the glacier .
Radar and GPS measurements will be made to supplement existing ice thickness and velocity data , which are needed as input for a model of glacier dynamics .
The model will be used to relate geologic measurements to the grounding-line position downstream .
Ultimately , the mapping , dating and ice-modeling components of the study will be integrated into a reconstruction that defines changes in ice thickness in the southern Ross Sea since the LGM , and relates these changes to the history of grounding-line retreat .
This work directly addresses key goals of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet Initiative , which are to understand the dynamics , recent history and possible future behavior of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet .
The objectives of this research are to detect and document changes in the storage of freshwater in the Arctic regions of the Western Canadian , Alaskan , and Eastern Siberian Arctic , to ascribe those changes to their land cover or climate source , and assess the impacts of past and future variations in storage components ( e.g. , active layer depth , lake volume ) on freshwater inputs into the Arctic Ocean .
The aim is to characterize the changing hydrologic regime spatially to facilitate accurate projections of future hydrologic conditions and to develop a numerical modeling capability that 1 ) accurately captures contemporary climatic and hydrologic dynamics , 2 ) projects reasonably accurate responses to future scenarios and 3 ) incorporates well documented algorithms that will be distributed to other modeling groups wishing to include dynamic land surface processes in arctic regions ( e.g. , for studies of vegetation dynamics or gas flux ) .
The investigators will also provide a pan-Arctic perspective by using spatially-based model results to develop a statistically-based model .
The research is divided broadly into two main components process-level hydrologic studies and large-scale atmospheric studies , with a well-defined approach to bridge the scale differences .
Process-level studies include field observations and analyses of the storage components in the hydrological cycle as well as modeling of their role in the hydrological cycle .
Field studies include surveys of the main storage components , with literature searches and remote sensing filling in many of the gaps .
Field studies on the watershed scale will also be conducted at several small watersheds along North/South transects covering the Middle Yukon , Kuparuk , Upper Yukon , Mackenzie and Lena watersheds where long-term records and on-going measurement programs exist .
The WaterWERCs model will be applied to these small sub-watersheds for calibration and validation using contemporary records , and to the entire watersheds for both climate scenarios of the past , present and future driven from our atmospheric modeling .
The atmospheric model , PAM , is a state-of-the-art regional climate model that will be tailored for use in a pan-Arctic setting and will be driven by gridded atmospheric re-analyses .
The atmospheric model results will be validated with available observational data and the gridded model output will be used to force a hydrologic model .
OpdykeEAR-0229130This study will undertake a time averaged field ( TAF ) study of late Pliocene - Pleistocene lava flows in the equatorial volcanic province of Ecuador , where abundant volcanism offers excellent possibilities of sampling .
More than 54 stratovolcanoes in Ecuador form part of the northern segment of the Andean volcanic belt , called the Northern Volcanic Zone ( NVZ ) , which extends from 5o N to 2o S latitude ( covering parts of Colombia and Ecuador ) .
Paleomagnetic sampling and rock sampling for 40Ar/39Ar dating is planned on at least 40 sites .
Fieldwork will be carried out with the collaboration of Dr. Minard Hall , professor of the Department of Geophysics ( Escuela Politecnica Nacional , Quito ) , who is the person with the most knowledge and experience of the volcanology of Ecuador .
His knowledge of the volcanic stratigraphy of the area will expedite and optimize fieldwork .
Paleomagnetic and Ar/Ar laboratory analysis will be made at the University of Florida .
Paleointensity studies will be carried out on as many sites as possible .
This study will help to fill an existing gap in the paleomagnetic database of suitable secular variation studies at equatorial latitudes .
State of the art measurements during fieldwork , laboratory and data analysis will be applied in this study in order to obtain results sensitive to non-dipole contributions of the magnetic field ( about 5 % of the total magnetic field ) .
This study will comply with present day selection criteria of paleomagnetic databases According to model G of secular variation , angular dispersion at the equator can be attributed solely to the quadrupole family of harmonics and not to the main dipole , thus making Ecuador a strategic point of observation of the paleomagnetic field .
The agreement observed in many studies between latitudinal variations of the angular dispersion ( relative to the Earth 's axis of rotation ) of the present field and the paleomagnetic field will be tested .
This study will contribute to enhance the paleomagnetic database of lava flows which at the present moment seem to indicate , although not conclusively due to deficiencies of the database , the coincidence between longitudinal structures in the TAF of the last 5 Ma and the present field .
On the other hand changes of the present field in the last two decades have lead some to suggest an on-going reversal scenario ( Hulot et al. , 2002 ) which could be hardly considered a normal state of the magnetic field .
This study will undertake a much-needed secular variation study in Ecuador , following rigorous paleomagnetic techniques with excellent age control .
Wood0229495There is debate in the scientific literature as to the extent to which the platinum-group elements ( PGE , e.g. , platinum , palladium , iridium ) can be transported and concentrated by hydrothermal fluids to form ore deposits .
The debate is hampered by a lack of experimental data with which to test the hypothesis that hydrothermal processes play a role in the concentration of the PGE to economic levels .
To redress this lack of data , a series of experiments will be conducted .
Some of these experiments will attempt to determine the relative solubilities of palladium , platinum , and iridium in hydrothermal solutions of geological relevance .
Other experiments will be conducted to simulate the effect of hydrothermal fluids on magnesium-rich ; PGE-bearing rocks similar to those in many PGE occurrences .
The latter experiments will attempt to directly model hydrothermal processes that have occurred in the Marathon copper-palladium deposit in the Coldwell Complex , Ontario .
The mineral assemblages and conditions employed in the latter experiments will be based on concurrent field-based research on the deposit being conducted by colleagues at the University of Windsor ( I.M .
Samson , B.J .
Fryer ) and the University of Waterloo ( R. Linnen ) .
A postdoctoral fellow , an undergraduate student , and a graduate student will participate in the project and will be trained in aqueous geochemistry .
Both will be encouraged to present their work at national scientific meetings , and the postdoctoral fellow will participate in teaching of undergraduate geochemistry .
The project will strengthen and expand existing collaboration between the PI and Canadian colleagues .
The results of this research will be of direct socioeconomic benefit via the development of improved exploration models for PGE deposits .
They may also lead to improved methods of hydrometallurgical treatment of PGE ores and to a better understanding of the corrosion of PGE and PGE-alloys in hydrothermal solutions .
This CAREER project combines a research component -- designing a practical approach to program termination verification that includes both theoretical study and actual implementation -- with an educational component -- undertaking the enhancement , for both undergraduates and graduates , of programming language education .
The research on termination verification recognizes that , in practice , the programmer often knows for some reasons that a particular program should terminate if implemented correctly and would therefore find great value in a termination checker able to detect program errors that cause non-terminating program execution .
Unfortunately , termination checking in a programming language that supports general recursion is often prohibitively expensive .
In order to design a termination checker for practical use , the project explores some recent results on the use of dependent types in practical programming , allowing the programmer to encode into dependent types the metrics needed for ensuring program termination and then use type-checking to verify that the provided metrics indeed suffice .
The research focuses on providing a mechanism that truly can be applied in practice .
RyanEAR-0229663This project will define the roles of the mantle wedge and subducting slab in generating volcanic arc lavas using B-Be-Li abundances and Li isotopes .
The main scientific goal of the project is to better constrain the geochemical variability of sub-arc mantle regions , and the origins of that variation .
Two different but comparable subduction systems will be studied the Trans-Mexican Volcanic belt ( TMVB ) and the more vigorously subducting and B-enriched Guatemala segment of the Central American arc .
These systems have low B/Be ratios and abundant off-axis volcanism , and offer the opportunity to assess the role of the mantle and constrain effects of crustal assimilation .
The project will be conducted in two phases 1 ) an undergraduate summer research experience , where students from the University of South Florida and other participating institutions measure B-Be-Li elemental abundances in lavas from these suites , and 2 ) MS/PhD student research on the Li isotope systematics of lavas from the TMVB , Guatemala , and key intraplate volcanic sites .
This work plan will train a cadre of undergraduate and graduate students in the use of geochemistry as a tool in the study of volcanic arcs .
EAR-0229103Keith D. KoperThis project will use high frequency seismic waves recorded atseismograph stations of the International Monitoring System ( IMS ) to map and model the fine structure of Earth 's inner core .
The sameproperties and techniques that make IMS array stations useful fordetecting and locating nuclear weapons tests make them ideal forobserving the often faint seismic phases that interact withthe inner core .
Although the inner core is quite small physicallyit plays a large role with respect to the geodynamo , and moregenerally with respect to heat transfer within the Earth .
In thesame sense that ice cores can be used to deduce past climatefluctuations it may be possible to use seismic models of the fineradial structure of the inner core to constrain the history of Earth'smagnetic field.The data gathered from IMS stations will be processed withstandard array techniques such as beamforming , fk analysis , andphase-weighted stacking to observe core reflections ( ScP , PcP , PKiKP , SKiKP ) and refractions ( PKPbc , PKPdf ) .
Relative propertiesamong phases recorded on the same seismogram will be used tomitigate the effect of shallow structure .
Specific researchtargets include using PcP/PKiKP amplitude ratios to constrainthe shear velocity at the top of the inner core and the densityjump across the inner core-outer core boundary ( ICB ) , modelingprecritical PKiKP phases to constrain the thickness of the ICB , evaluating the hypothesis of an anisotropic discontinuity beneaththe ICB using quasi-polar PKPbc and PKPdf phases , and evaluatingthe inner-core scattering hypothesis by analyzing the codaof precritical PKiKP phases in the transparent zone. -- The Miami Museum of Science , in collaboration with the Science Museum of Minnesota , will develop a 5000-sq .
ft. interactive , bilingual traveling exhibition titled Amazon Voyage Vicious Fishes and OtherRiches .
The exhibition will immerse visitors in the Amazon 's rich diversity through direct contact with some of its most ( ill-deservedly ) notorious denizens .
Spotlighting the rarely seen research conducted by renowned North- and South American scientists , Amazon Voyage will present visitors with the scientists ' ongoing work .
Visitors will discover that economy and ecology of the Amazon are intertwined , and explore their own connection to this region through the global trade in ornamental fish , arriving at a heightened appreciation of how personal choices can influence environmental outcomes .
Proposal # 0229441PI WickleinInst U of GA Res Fdn IncThe primary focus of this one-year project is to design and develop a model summer engineering education institute focusing on integration of engineering content with mathematics , science , and technology education that could motivate academically qualified high school seniors to seriously consider engineering majors in college .
Another objective is The institute model builds teams of educators at various levels - teacher educators from mathematics , science and technology education ; engineering educators ; in-service teachers ; pre-service teachers ; undergraduate engineering students ; and secondary students - to stimulate the inclusion of significant engineering related instructional content within the public school curriculum .
The teams will participate in a variety of classroom and laboratory-based experiences along with field trips and motivational speakers that focus on engineering concepts to illustrate real-world applications of mathematics , science , and technology .
Faculty in engineering and education and teachers continue to develop engineering enhanced instructional materials and strategies to be tested in public schools and the university in the months following the institute .
9906552SomervilleThe goal of this proposal is to illuminate experimentally the physics of burnout and on-state breakdown in InAlAs/InGaAs high electron mobility transistors ( HEMTs ) .
These devices are extremely attractive for a growing number of high frequency applications , including collision avoidance radar systems , wireless LANS , and ultra high speed switching networks .
Many of the applications require high breakdown voltage ; as a result , great effort has been devoted to understanding and improving off-state breakdown in InAlAs/InGaAs HEMTs .
However , as off-state breakdown has improved , it has become clear that the bottleneck is the problem of on-state breakdown and associated burnout .
Relatively little work has been done in this area .
It is thought that impact ionization is involved , but the details of the mechanism are unknown , as are the impact of various device design parameters .
By investigating the physics of on-state breakdown and burnout , the proposed research program will identify promising design directions for InAlAs/InGaAs HEMTs to help alleviate the problem.The research program involves development of a customized measurement system to allow visible and NIR spectroscopy of on-state breakdown in InAlAs/InGaAs HEMTs under a variety of thermal and bias conditions ; the use of the system for extensive measurements on a large sample set of state-of-the-art devices ; and extensive data reduction and model development .
The project is designed with student participation in mind ; much of the work will be done by undergraduate researchers under the supervision of the PI .
Thus , in addition to enhancing understanding of the problem of on-state breakdown , the proposed research program will introduce undergraduate students to modern research techniques and instrumentation in the area of device physics , and will afford these students the opportunity to do real research on a critical technology .
*** This proposal is a synthesis and integration study of the pan-Arctic water cycle .
An Expanded Arctic Regional Integrated Monitoring System ( E-RIMS ) will be developed that links an existing , operational hydrological monitoring system for the pan-Arctic landmass and atmosphere ( Arctic-RIMS ) to an Arctic Ocean and sea ice component .
On the terrestrial side , E-RIMS will produce time varying aerological and land surface water budgets including river and ice melt inputs to the Arctic Ocean .
For the ocean , freshwater fluxes from the atmosphere and land will be used in concert with observed mass , heat and momentum forcing to drive a coupled ocean-sea ice-atmosphere model .
The linked models will be used to examine the origin of freshwater fluxes in the atmosphere and landmass and how water is then partitioned between solid ( sea ice ) and liquid forms in the ocean .
E-RIMS will also track freshwater transport off the shelf , downward below the mixed layer , and laterally toward the straits leading to the North Atlantic Ocean .
The near real-time monitoring program and historical analysis ( from 1960 ) provides an important benchmark for understanding future change to the arctic hydrologic cycle .
In keeping with current Arctic-RIMS protocols , provisional data sets ( ca .
1-2 month delay ) will be made available and then re-analyzed at yearly intervals for improved quality assurance .
All key elements of the terrestrial and ocean water balance will be provided , including an assessment of potential error .
Operational data sets will be freely accessible on partner institution web sites and through NSIDC .
E-RIMS will complement efforts by other investigators using more fully coupled air-land-ocean models , by providing to them initial and boundary conditions and by carrying-out a set of preliminary numerical experiments to help design their more computationally expensive feedback studies .
As a final part of this work , NWP predictions and medium-term forecasts will be used to explore how much skill will have been developed over the course of this study .
FerryEAR-0229267In this project , the PI and his graduate students will conduct field and laboratory studies on the origin and the mineralogical , isotopic , and chemical evolution of metamorphic rocks .
Infiltration of rocks deep in the Earth 's crust during episodes of mountain building by chemically reactive H2O-CO2 fluids is now recognized as an essential driving force of mineral reactions during metamorphism .
Much progress has been made over the last decade in understanding the sources , amounts , geometry , and geological controls on reactive fluid transport in contact aureoles .
Details of the physical and chemical behavior of reactive fluids during regional metamorphism , however , have remained more obscure and are the subject of research supported by this grant .
A fundamental characteristic of regional metamorphic terrains is the common occurrence in siliceous carbonate rocks of mineral reactants and products in proportions that vary widely on scales ranging from several mm to several 100 m. The specific , pivotal question that will be addressed is whether these occurrences result from flow of variable amounts of reactive fluid within different , chemically isolated layers or whether they result from variations in initial amounts and compositions of minerals prior to reaction in different layers that maintain perfect or almost perfect chemical communication by diffusion .
The answer to the question , in turn , will lead to an understanding of the mechanism ( diffusion vs. flow ) and geometry of reactive fluid transport during regional metamorphism , the source ( s ) of reactive fluid , the driving force for reaction , and the amount of fluid involved .
In order to draw general conclusions , investigations will be made of carbonate rocks in medium-pressure terrains in eastern Vermont and the southern Swiss Alps and in a low-pressure terrain in south-central Maine .
Research will involve mapping and sample collection in the field , chemical analysis of minerals with an electron microprobe , chemical analysis of whole-rock samples by X-ray fluorescence , O and C stable isotope analysis of carbonates and silicates by mass spectrometry , and calculations based on geochemical thermodynamics and transport theory .
The project will support the training of three women Ph.D. students at Johns Hopkins University .
We are developing open-ended computer simulations of protein laboratoryprocedures for case-based learning in international biology curricula .
We are distributingthese simulations freely via Internet download so that they are available to university andhigh school students worldwide .
Existing protein software applications lack the ability toproduce realistic , easily understandable output for procedures such as enzymeimmunoassays , hemagglutination inhibition , immunofluorescence , proteinelectrophoresis , and western blotting .
Such procedures are especially useful for theanalysis of cases involving infectious diseases of humans and domestic animals includinganthrax , foot-and-mouth disease , influenza , HIV infection , hantavirus , encephalitis , Lymedisease , genital herpes , hepatitis , brucellosis and rinderpest , among many others .
Theyprovide a vehicle for making topics in molecular biology more interesting and relevant tostudents , particularly female non-science majors .
Protein simulations complementDNA simulations we have previously developed and freely distributed for the analysis of casesbased primarily on human genetic diseases .
The proposed simulations have wideapplicability because they can be adapted to any protein-based case scenario .
Studentscan participate in Internet poster sessions via an online integrated web editor /conferencing system we developed with prior NSF support.Pre-service science teachers are being used as research assistants for assessment , and resultsare being widely disseminated via presentations , workshops , and publications including theBioQUEST Library .
The BioQUEST Curriculum Consortium strongly supports thisproposal and is assisting in the evaluation and dissemination of project results .
This study will combine data synthesis and land surface modeling to assemble the best possible time series ( 20+ years ) for the Arctic terrestrial drainage of land surface state variables ( snow water equivalent , soil moisture , soil temperature ) and moisture and energy fluxes ( sensible , latent , and ground heat ; radiation ) .
Development of forcing fields will draw in part from an ongoing NSF effort known as Arctic-RIMS , geared at historical analysis and monitoring of the Arctic terrestrial hydrologic budget .
The present effort both complements Arctic-RIMS and lays groundwork for a next-generation monitoring and prediction capability .
The generated time series will be used to address spatial-temporal variability in sensible heat flux and evapo-transpiration , land surface feedbacks on precipitation , and development of the summer Arctic frontal zone .
This study will attempt to produce the best possible quality model forcing over the pan-Arctic domain by blending output from the new ERA-40 atmospheric reanalysis project with gridded in-situ observations and satellite data streams .
Major challenges include maintaining physical consistency between time series of variables at different native spatial and temporal resolutions and providing realistic diurnal cycles .
A particularly novel aspect of the proposed work will be use of a multi-model ensemble approach .
Five different Land Surface Models will be used , all of which have been extensively tested for Arctic applications under the Project for Intercomparison of Land-Surface Parameterization Schemes ( PILPS ) Experiment 2e .
The multi-model LSM ensemble average for each output variable should be superior to the values provided by a single run with any one LSM.The data will also be useful for model validation efforts , such as the Arctic Regional Climate Model Inter-comparison Project , and in providing a source of high latitude evaluation data for the Atmospheric Model Inter-comparison Project .
The project will contribute to educational goals through support of a graduate student and post-docs .
Results from this study and related projects will be used as part of seminar course on the Arctic climate system to be taught at University of Colorado .
This study will focus on compiling existing knowledge from arctic water balance studies .
This will be accomplished through 1 ) data collection through a survey of individual sites , 2 ) integrated data set development , and 3 ) comparative analysis .
This research will create a unique database of water balance elements for the high latitude basins .
The data will be used to compare and understand the water balance results from high latitude watersheds , with special emphasis on inter-annual variability , regional variability , long-term averages of the various hydrologic components ( annual and seasonal ) , methodology for computations and scientific framework .
Common issues , both strengths and weaknesses in northern hydrologic studies will be identified and collaborative research efforts to address these common issues will be recommended .
The overall goal of this effort is to advance our understanding of circumpolar hydrologic processes through the synthesis of existing international data sets .
9704344 Phillips The proposal was evaluated by four reviewers , resulting in ratings of Excellent ( 1 ) Very Good ( 2 ) , and Good ( 1 ) .
Review Analysis The outcome of the review was an overall show of support for the proposed project .
The proposal , for example , was characterized by most of the reviewers as focusing on an important topic , conceptually and methodologically sound , involving quite capable investigators , and likely to lead to useful results .
Even the one reviewer who was more critical noted that the project would have significant impact because of its educational component .
Recommended Action An outstanding team of researchers has been assembled to carry out this research , which would involve cross-university collaboration and provide important experience for participating students .
The team includes an up-and-coming younger investigator and two senior researchers who are at the top of the field .
The topic is very important , and the research would be guided by a well-conceived conceptual and methodological plan .
A three-year continuing award is recommended .
*** A Workshop on Computational Sciences , Mathematics , and Engineering is planned for the fall of 2002 .
The purpose of the workshop is to develop a planning document for future research directions and resources needed to advance the solution of a limited number of significant problems of national interest .
These core problems , which will be selected by the workshop participants , will provide a focus to define the generic issues of a computational science discipline .
The core problems will be addressed through collaborations among application scientists , mathematicians , statisticians , and computer scientists .
A workshop report will be produced and disseminated that will summarize the discussion and conclusions of the workshop .
A web site is planned as part of the effort .
The proposed research will document the circulation , variability , and driving mechanisms of the upper ocean in the freshwater switchyard of the Arctic Ocean .
This unexplored region lies to the north of the eastern Canadian Archipelago and Greenland , extending about 500-800 km into the central Arctic Ocean .
It lies just upstream of the freshwater exit points in Fram and Nares Straits , i.e. , where freshwater from various sources is finally delivered to some of the main channels that lead to the North Atlantic Ocean .
The main hypothesis is that this area is a bifurcation point for freshwater transfer between the Arctic and North Atlantic Oceans , and that small changes in the overall circulation of this region may have large downstream effects .
This study will measure ocean temperature , salinity , currents , and geochemical freshwater tracers such as oxygen , oxygen isotopes , tritium/3He , CFC.s , barium , and nutrients .
The focus will be on the upper ocean ( 0-300 m ) where freshwater resides .
This will be an aircraft-based operation , because thick sea ice prevents access by most surface ships and political realities prevent access by submarine .
There will also be a satellite-based study of sea ice motion and thickness in the switchyard region which will determine how much ice recirculates westward within the Beaufort Gyre , how much exits through Fram Strait , and how much exits within the various passages of the Canadian Archipelago .
Results from this study will be made available via an internet web site that will be linked to other similar ongoing projects , as well as through presentations and articles in both scientific and popular formats .
Additionally , they will be used for educational purposes through involvement of both graduate and undergraduate students , and in course material .
A special link to numerical modeling studies is planned via incorporation of our data into a gridded ocean database as well as raw validation data .
The appropriate logistics infrastructure at NSF has been developed over the past several years as part of various projects , in particular the North Pole Environmental Observatory , an aircraft-based project staged out of Alert/Eureka .
ABSTRACTSelective adsorption of aqueous solutes onto mineral surfaces represents an important mechanism for the concentration , sequestration and organization of organic molecules .
Such mineral-organic interactions play key roles in processes as diverse as aquifer purification , biofilm formation and the origin of life.In this regard , the selective adsorption of chiral ( left-handed versus right-handed ) molecules is of special interest .
Strong chiral preference for amino acids , sugars and other essential biomolecules is a defining characteristic of biological systems .
Abiotic processes that select left-handed versus right-handed molecules are thus central to geochemical models of life 's origin .
Chiral recognition and separation of molecules , furthermore , is vital to pharmacological activity of many drugs , biodegradation of packaging materials , development of improved polymers , and many other applications in science and industry.Previous work described selective adsorption of D- and L-aspartic acid , a biological amino acid , on chiral crystal growth faces of calcite .
Such chiral selectivity on surfaces of a centric mineral had been predicted by theory , but had not been demonstrated experimentally .
This proposal seeks to document further this behavior and to investigate structural mechanisms by which chiral organic molecules adsorb selectively on mineral surfaces .
A multi-disciplinary , collaborative , two-part research program includesI .
Phenomenology of Chiral Adsorption on Minerals Research will expand on previous studies , which demonstrated chiral selectivity on mineral surfaces , by establishing the range and extent of chiral adsorption on mineral surfaces .
Proposed experiments include1 .
Investigation of the adsorption of other chiral amino acids , both biological and non-biological , onto calcite crystal growth surfaces.2 .
Investigation of the adsorption of chiral amino acid derivatives , sugars , nucleotides and other chiral species onto calcite crystal growth surfaces.3 .
Investigation of chiral adsorption onto crystal growth surfaces of gypsum and quartz , both of which are geochemically important minerals that display chiral crystal growth surfaces.II .
Adsorption Mechanisms - Experimental Approaches Structural mechanisms that underlie chiral adsorption of organic molecules on these mineral surfaces will be investigated .
Proposed experiments include1 .
Liquid-immersion atomic force microscopy imaging of calcite crystal growth surfaces Observations will be made of both surface growth and dissolution in the presence and absence of chiral adsorbates.2 .
Use of site-specific fluorescent tags Calcite surfaces with an adsorbed layer of amino acids will be exposed to a variety of fluorescent tags to determine the orientation and distribution of adsorbed molecules.These proposed studies , in concert with ongoing theoretical models of the adsorption process , will lead to an understanding of structural mechanisms of chiral selection .
This work , furthermore , will lay the groundwork for future investigations that adaptmicroarray technology to the combinatorial study numerous of mineral surfaces and adsorbed organic species in a single experiment .
AbstractThe overall goal of the proposed research , jointly proposed by Purdue University and Michigan State University is to improve the production process planning and facility layout design through a Whole House and Building Process Redesign approach .
The main objectives in support of the stated goal include , developing an optimal production process model for manufactured housing that would resolve the production bottlenecks identified through previous NSF-PATH research ; developing innovative design alternatives for factory layout ; simulating the facility layout alternatives based on the optimal process model to identify the optimal facility layout ( s ) ; and investigating radical and innovative changes in the production system and the house design itself that would integrate advanced technology and innovative design into the production system and identify progressive avenues for future research and advancements .
The research results will be developed as a continuing education program for the industry and will be disseminated in conjunction with industry partners.The proposed research has a direct focus on the 3rd milestone identified by the PATH technology road-map Whole House and building process redesign .
Furthermore , if the broader definition of the proposed research is taken into account then it will also substantially affect the 1st milestone , i.e .
application of information technology in housing .
This research would have a significant impact on both criteria 1 and 2 through integration of research & education ( criterion-1 ) and in integrating diversity into the research process ( criterion-2 ) .
The California Academy of Sciences will produceWater is Life , a 30,383 square-foot permanent exhibit with educational programming .
The exhibit is designed to engage the public with the living world of water , to foster environmental stewardship and increase science literacy .
Three habitat components -- Philippine Coral Reef , California Coast and Global Rainforests -- are conceptually and experientially linked through Water Planet , which explores water 's physical properties and how they impact living organisms and lead to aquatic diversity .
Each component also reinforces the importance of conserving aquatic resources .
Educational programming takes Water is Life to local schools and community events and onto the World Wide Web , as well as provides venues for formative evaluation of exhibit design elements .
The development of lending kits , plus supporting manuals and workshops , will extend the reach of Water is Life regionally and nationally .
Similarly , instruction manuals and workshops for creating desktop , living reefs will have national impact .
The compelling draw of live organisms , hands-on activities , and exhibit enrichment through educational programming provide accessibility to a large , diverse audience .
The exhibit will reach over one million annual visitors , and a larger audience will experience distributed educational programs .
This is an Alan T. Waterman 's Award .
The PI has described a new technique for the automated analysis of strain in analogexperiments .
Using this technique , he propose to test a series of published analyticaland numerical models for the behavior of critical wedges , both Coulomb and viscous , focusing upon three broad questions.These questions include- the conditions for the formation of a double retrowedge , - the rheological and geometric constraints on the occurrence of extension in criticalwedges- the strain and rotational signatures of a suite of proposed mechanisms for the formationof lobate mountain rangesIn this modeling , he will emphasize- the testing of specific predictions for critical wedge behavior based upon numerical andanalog modeling , and- relating alternative models for the creation of arcuate mountain belts to specificgeological observables ( finite strains , slip vectors , geodetic strain rate patterns , structural traces ) by which models might be discriminated from each other .
This research will examine the effects of anthropogenic activity and global warming on freshwater and organic carbon input to the Arctic Ocean from the Lena River for the last 50-150 years .
Additionally , it will reconstruct the late Holocene freshwater and organic carbon discharges for the past 2,000 years .
The overarching goal will be to assess impacts of late Holocene climate change on watershed-river-upper ocean linkages .
The research will obtain a broad suite of observations , including bottom sediment and water column properties , from the Lena River delta and will use these to parameterize the historical data .
Age dating will be done using radioactive decay methods to produce a reliable annual to decadal age model , microfossils from sediment cores will be analyzed to reconstruct the Lena River 's fluvial dynamics , and palynological studies will recover information about past environmental change in the Lena watershed .
Results will be correlated with tree-ring records to generate information on arctic/subarctic humidity and precipitation .
Globally , the results will contribute to understanding contributions of the Russian arctic rivers to global hydrologic and carbon cycles .
0229176 Shoemaker Site-specific pollution transport models are based on field data and the calibration of the parameter values that can not be directly measured .
This combination of field data and calibrated model is a powerful tool in environmental analysis .
However , one of the difficulties in using such models is that the calibration process can be computationally very demanding if it is done thoroughly .
An even more serious computational obstacle is the quantification of the uncertainty associated with model forecasts of pollution transport.This proposal develops a new computational procedure ( acronym ROCUS ) that can be applied to a range of pollution transport problems .
In the proposed research , ROCUS will be applied to a large watershed in New York , for which the PI 's research model results are currently being used in formulating regulatory policy .
ROCUS will also be used for anaerobic bioremediation of chlorinated ethenes using field data collected by DOD and an 18 species reactive transport model developed by the PI and her students.The ROCUS procedure involves a group of computationally efficient algorithms for calibration , combined sensitivity and uncertainty analysis that is integrated through the use of response surface methods .
One of the hypothesis of the study is that computation time to find good values for model calibration can be significantly reduced by replacing methods currently in use with one or both of the two new optimization algorithms to be investigated .
These two methods both involve the use of a Radial Basis Function response surface coupled with a new optimization algorithm .
Previously published papers and the PI 's computational experiments support this hypothesis .
The extent to which this hypothesis is valid will be assessed in the proposed research by a systematic comparison of accuracy and computational speed of the two response surface optimization algorithms with two existing heuristic methods .
These tests will be performed on the two environmental applications and on standard global optimization test problems.The applications represented are very serious pollution problems , and the results will add to scientific understanding and to methods for environmental protection .
The teaching and research objectives will be obtained by incorporation of research results into two courses the PI teaches .
Research infrastructure contributions will follow from the interdisciplinary nature of the research .
In addition , the PI has a long history of working to promote underrepresented groups , especially women engineers , and this research project will continue that effort .
Stone/0229915Several recent studies have shown indications of continued ice-sheet thinning in West Antarctica .
Geological evidence of much larger-scale deglaciation in the past is therefore a cause for concern over the future of the ice sheet .
This award supports an exposure-dating study that will help to determine the frequency , extent and duration of previous deglaciations , and show whether the present state of West Antarctic ice cover is typical , or highly unusual .
The project is based on measurements of cosmic-ray-produced nuclides , which accumulate only when rock surfaces are exposed above the ice sheet .
Provided these surfaces are protected during glaciation by non-erosive , cold-based ice , nuclide concentrations build up to record the cumulative history of exposure and ice cover .
Although this method can not be used to date specific prior glaciations , it can be used to obtain minimum limits on the total duration of past exposure and glaciation , and maximum limits on exposure within the late Quaternary ( approximately the past million years ) .
As an example of this , trial Al-26/Be-10 measurements on a sample of bedrock from Marie Byrd Land reveal a history extending back to the Pliocene , in which the sampled surface has experienced very limited exposure .
The results indicate a cumulative exposure time of ~130,000 years , in 3.5 million years of ( non-erosive ) ice cover , and limit the total exposure time in the past million years to less than ~10,000 years .
Evidently this particular surface seldom outcrops , suggesting that the current state of deglaciation in Marie Byrd Land is unusual compared to most interglacial periods in the late Quaternary .
This project will explore this possibility with further , coupled Be-10/Al-26 analyses of bedrock samples collected during the 2000-01 field season .
If consistent results emerge , like those described above , scientists will be able to constrain ( i ) the long-term average configuration of the ice sheet in this region , ( ii ) how much of the current terrain is typically exposed during interglacial periods , ( iii ) the comparative frequency and duration of deglaciation in the early Quaternary vs the late Quaternary , and ( iv ) the duration of late-Quaternary deglaciation events , which may be linked to previous episodes of extensive deglaciation reported in the literature .
EAR-0229391While Seismologists have long known that friction is one of the fundamental processes operating during earthquake rupture and slip , the actual physical mechanism behind the frictional behavior we believe we see in earthquakes remains elusive .
There are strong physical arguments that at the high slip rates seen in earthquakes , frictional heating of pore fluids could dynamically reduce the frictional stress , greatly increasing the stress drop .
Under even more extreme conditions , frictional melting of the fault zone may further affect the frictional environment .
We propose to investigate these processes by coupling a 1-D hydrothermal/poroelastic model for heat flow and fluid behavior with a 3-D dynamic faulting model for rupture and slip behavior .
Using this combined method , we will be able to investigate the effects of thermal fluid pressurization and rock melting on fault stress , and determine the resulting effects on fault motion and radiated seismic waves .
Behaviors predicted by our models can be compared with seismic data for verification .
The origin of eukaryotes , organisms with distinct subcellular structures isolated by membranes , is a significant discussion in evolutionary biology .
If Bacteria and Archaea are prokaryotic domains of life , then a core of eukaryotic signature proteins , having no detectable homology to known prokaryotic proteins should exist .
Using both sequence-and sequence/structure based methods , this proposal will examine the phylogenetic origins of eukaryotic proteins .
From initial students a preliminary candidate list of proteins has been assembled .
Confirming or denying the membership of a protein or protein domain in the set is the goal of this work .
Some of the required software , particularly Bayesian prior-based profiles and domain dissection tools have been begun .
These will be refined for use in remote homology , where sequence similarity has virtually disappeared .
The results of this study , which will be accessible in publication and web , will provide data to inform and constrain the theories about the origins of eukaryotes and the mechanisms of expansion of the eukaryotic proteome .
AST 0205994SchweizerThe formation and evolution of galaxies is of central interest in present-day astrophysics .
Thereis mounting evidence that many galaxies grew from smaller units , and that galactic mergers mayhave played a major role in determining the shapes and dynamics of certain remnants , and perhapseven of elliptical galaxies .
However , the details of this assembly remain unclear , and there areseveral competing hypotheses for the formation of ellipticals .
Fortunately , a few galactic mergersstill occur in the local universe and o.er valuable clues to the past assembly process.The 1992 discovery that globular star clusters form in large numbers during mergers of gas-richgalaxies has opened new avenues to studying the formation and evolution of globular clusters andof their host galaxies .
Questions of current interest are Is there an evolutionary link betweenglobular clusters formed in mergers and old globular clusters in giant elliptical galaxies ?
Howdo systems of globular clusters formed in mergers evolve ?
Specifically , how do their luminosityfunctions , metallicity distributions , and kinematics evolve ?
Do galactic mergers imprint clustersystems with kinematic signatures ( e.g. , fast outer rotation ) that can be traced along a sequenceof merger remnants of increasing age ? The Principal Investigator , Francois Schweizer , proposes carefully designed observational studiesto address these questions .
He points out that-whereas the birth of young clusters in ongoingmergers and the properties of old globular clusters in ellipticals have been studied widely in recentyears-there is a surprising lack of knowledge about globular-cluster systems of intermediate age.Yet , these systems hold great promise for directly addressing the above issues.Dr .
Schweizer and collaborators were among the .rst to study globular clusters formed in mergerswith the Hubble Space Telescope and to follow up with ground-based spectroscopic observationsto determine their ages and chemical abundances .
He will now search for globular clusters of intermediateage ( 1 - 7 Gyr ) in about a dozen galaxies thought to be transition objects between ongoingmergers ( e.g. , NGC 4038/39 ) and old ellipticals .
He will use both the Baade 6.5-m telescope atLas Campanas Observatory and the Advanced Survey Camera on the Hubble Space Telescope toobtain some of the deepest images ever taken of these transition objects and their globular-clustersystems .
Photometric analysis of these images , as well as of Hubble archival images , will yield thechronology of these cluster systems from their broad-band colors.The same deep images will also be used to study the evolution of the globular-cluster luminosityfunction with time .
The luminosity functions of fresh-born cluster systems are power laws , while those of ancient systems are close to lognormal .
Theory predicts that as globular-clustersystems age , their luminosity functions should evolve from the .rst to the second shape throughpreferential erosion of low-mass clusters .
Deep luminosity functions reaching past the predictedturnover magnitudes will be measured from the images to subject this prediction to a critical test.A parallel program of multi-slit spectroscopy mainly with the Magellan 6.5-m telescopes , butalso with the northern Gemini 8-m telescope , will yield metallicities and more accurate ages for somekey globular-cluster systems of intermediate age .
Measurements of radial velocities for typically40 - 200 clusters per galaxy will permit comparative studies of the kinematics of metal-poor andmetal-rich globulars within the same galaxy .
This will yield valuable clues about the origins ofwhat are thought to be .rst- and 2nd-generation cluster subpopulations.These observational studies will test all proposed formation mechanisms for ellipticals andwill-specifically-focus on possible evidence for an evolutionary link between 2nd-generation globularsformed in mergers and metal-rich globulars in old ellipticals .
The results from this projectwill help improve our understanding not only of globular-cluster formation and evolution , but alsoof galaxy formation and growth and , ultimately , of the origin of Hubble 's morphological sequenceof galaxy types .
*** AST 0205827PradhanThe spectra of iron and iron-peak elements are of fundamental interest in astronomy .
Althoughproduced as the end-products of stellar life cycles in supernovae , these elements trace the chemicaland physical history of the Universe even to high redshifts ( z ) .
Iron in particular is ubiquitous inmost astronomical sources stars , active galactic nuclei ( AGN ) , supernova remnants ( SNR 's ) , andthe interstellar and intergalactic media ( ISM and IGM ) .
Some of the basic questions are Howaccurately can we analyze the spectra and determine abundances in various types of stars ?
Is theabundance of iron a `chronometer ' of the earliest epochs of stellar formation ?
Can the spectra ofiron-peak elements be used for spectroscopic calibration of supernovae as `standard candles ' ? The spectra of iron-peak elements are complicated .
A considerable effort by the new generation oftelescopes and instruments will be directed towards their high-resolution spectroscopy .
But high resolution in observations demands high precision in theory .
Spectra obtained with great effort and expense remain inadequately analyzed owing to the absence or paucity of fundamental atomic parameters .
This is especially true of iron and iron-group elements .
However , large-scale computations with high precision are difficult and very time consuming .
Inspite of the progress made in the past decade , the requisite precision and quantity of the atomicparameters for iron-peak elements has not been attained to enable sufficiently accurate numericalmodels .
Much of the progress in the recent past has been due to two major international projectsin atomic astrophysics - the Opacity Project and the Iron Project .
While most of the state-of-the-art theoretical tools were developed under these projects , the actual computations are yet to be carried out and require further developments.Dr .
Anil Pradhan and colleagues at the Ohio State University will carry out a comprehensive effort based on recent advances in relativistic calculations for atomic processes for iron and iron-peak elements .
These relate primarily to electron impact excitation , photoionization , recombination , and radiative transition probabilities .
Dr. Pradhan 's effort is aimed at some outstanding problems that entail numerical spectroscopy of ( I ) iron spectra from AGN and strong Fe II emitting quasars , ( II ) Fe-peak elements ( Cr , Mn , Fe , Zn ) in the IGM , ( III ) Fe-Co-Ni spectra in SNR 's , ( IV ) Non-LTE monochromatic opacities for stellar modeling and abundance determinations , ( V ) an exact treatment of radiative transfer in Non-LTE models , using the new atomic data , for important ions such as Fe I-IV and Ni II , and ( VI ) for studies of iron spectra in AGN , Fe II/Mg II ratio vs. redshift , and Fe II/Ni II abundance anomalies in SNR 's and galaxies .
Physical excitation mechanisms such as Lyman-alpha and UV fluorescence will be studied .
The targeted atomic species are in low-ionization statesobserved mainly in the Optical and Near-IR from ground-based observatories .
As massive computational resources are an a priori requirement for this undertaking , Dr. Pradhan has secured a large allocation of computation time at the Ohio Supercomputer Center in Columbus , Ohio.*** .
This project is a multidisciplinary , international collaborative research project aimed at developing a theoretical understanding of the records generated by the scientific , government and artistic sections .
On this basis , the project will formulate and test various technology , metadata , and policy models , etc .
to ensure that records created using these systems can be trusted as to content reliability and accuracy and for subsequent multipurpose use .
The project will address issues related to how information technology is transforming functions of modern society , particularly in the areas of digital government , e-commerce and large-scale research efforts .
AST 0205785ThuanGalaxy formation is one of the most fundamental problems in astrophysics .
Most high-z objectsobserved thus far are found to be rich in heavy elements , thus not qualifying as bona fide primevalgalaxies .
An alternative approach is to search among nearby galaxies that may be actively formingstars for the first time at the present epoch .
The best candidates for such a search are extremely metalpoor blue compact dwarfs ( BCDs ) .
They constitute excellent laboratories for pursuing the following cosmological problems .
The standard hot big bang model of nucleosynthesis ( SBBN ) is one of the key quantitative tests of big bang cosmology .
The primordial abundance Yp of 4He , together with that of Deuterium , is crucial for checking the consistency of SBBN .
The relative insensitivity of 4He production to the baryonic matter density means that Yp needs to be determined to a precision of better than 1 % .
Dr. Trinh Thuan , at the University of Virginia , will evaluate systematic effects and correct Yp for them to attain that precision .
He will search for more extremely metal-deficient BCDs in the newly released Sloan Digital Sky Survey spectral data base to improve the determination of Yp .
The study of the BCD stellar populations will allow them to understand the properties of massive stellar populations in very low metallicity environments , like those prevailing in the era of galaxy formation .
Moreover , Cold Dark Matter models predict that low-mass dwarf galaxies could still be forming at the present epoch because they originate from density fluctuations considerably smaller than those giving rise to the giant ones .
Thus establishing the existence of young dwarf galaxies in the local universe will put strong constraints on the primordial density fluctuation spectrum .
Dr. Thuan will apply age-dating techniques which he has developed and refined to a sample of very metal-deficient BCDs .
There is a dichotomy in the way star formation proceeds in BCDs .
In some , star formation occurs in a passive low-level diffuse fashion , with a low extinction .
In others , active star formation occurs at a high level in Super Star Clusters , mixed with dense gas and a large amount of dust .
Dr. Thuan will study the physical parameters whichgovern that dichotomy .
Dr. Thuan will also study how the metallicity of the neutral gas compare with that of the ionized gas .
Is the metallicity of the H ii region higher because of self-enrichment ?
Which constraints can be put on the time scale for the mixing of newly formed heavy elements in the H ii region with the HI gas ?
If the metallicity of the HI gas is very low , that would put constraints on the amount of metal pre-enrichment by the hypothetical Population III stars during the early pregalactic epoch .
Such studies will shed new light on the study of abundances in high-redshift damped Lyman-alpha systems .
Finally , Dr. Thuan will use these models to study correlations of the efficiency of mass exchange between the galaxy and its environment with global properties of BCDs such as their sizes , luminosities , metallicities , star formation rates , etc .
*** AST 0205991PI LombardiClose interactions happen frequently in dense stellar systems , such as the cores of globular star clusters , where the density of stars can be so high that even physical collisions between stars can occur .
They can also happen during the evolution of close binary stars , where they often lead tomergers of the two components .
Close stellar interactions play a crucial role in determining the long-term dynamical evolution and final fate of dense star clusters .
In addition , dynamical interactions in these clusters are thought to be responsible for the production of large numbers of exotic objects such as X-ray sources , binary radio pulsars , and blue stragglers .
Understanding the long-term dynamical evolution of dense stellar systems and the formation mechanisms for the peculiar sources they contain are two long-standing problems in theoretical astrophysics .
This project will focus on a number of theoretical and computational studies dealing with various aspects of these hydrodynamic stellar interactions in dense star clusters and in binary star systems .
Large-scale numerical simulations of the hydrodynamic and stellar evolution processes will be performed on parallel supercomputers , providing quantitatively accurate theoretical predictions that can be compared directly to observations .
Much of the work will be carried out by undergraduate students .
*** AST 0205990ReynoldsBlack holes are responsible for some of the most dramatic phenomena seen in the current universe .
Furthermore , the environment immediately around a black hole is a naturally occurring laboratory in which many exotic physical processes will occur and can be studied .
Some of the most interesting phenomena are associated with the twisting and dragging of space and time due to the rotation of the black hole .
This project will conduct a theoretical exploration of the effect that a spinning black hole will have on its astrophysical surroundings .
This is an extremely timely study since modern X-ray telescopes are already starting to observe such effects.Theory suggests that magnetic fields will be crucial for the phenomena associated with black hole spin .
Guided by past work , Dr. Reynolds and his collaborators will split the investigation into three parts .
1 ) Conducting computer simulations of the gaseous flows ( including the magnetic fields ) in the vicinity of a black hole .
2 ) Employing simplifying assumptions and approximations to study the complex behavior of magnetic loops in the region very close to the black hole .
3 ) Computing predictions that can be directly tested by current and future observations with the XMM-Newton X-ray observatory .
*** AST 0205863BinzelUnraveling the fundamental relationships between asteroids , comets , and meteorites is afirst step toward important new insights into the early history of our own planetary system .
Observational investigation of the near-Earth object ( NEO ) population provides the unique opportunity for studying all three of these classes of objects .
The long-term interests of society also dictate that we achieve an understanding of the NEO population for assessing NEOs for their impact hazard and space resource potential.Dr .
Richard Binzel , at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology , will direct an observational program to measure the near infrared spectral properties for 40-60 NEOs per year , substantially increasing the quantity and quality of these types of observations of Earth 's nearest neighbors .
The near-infrared measurements will be made over the wavelength range 0.8-2.5Mm using the new state-of-the-art SpeX spectrograph at the Infrared Telescope Facility ( IRTF ) at Mauna Kea , Hawaii .
The principal goal of the project is basic reconnaissance of the near-infrared spectral characteristics of the NEO population .
The observations and data set will be a balance between measurements that push to the state-of-the-art limits of the technology for the smallest and faintest objects and measurements that provide high signal-to-noise-ratio spectra sufficient for detailed mineralogical analysis .
*** Pnueli , Emerson , and SistlaCCR-0205571 , CCR-0205483 and CCR-0205365Towards a Seamless Process for the Development of Embedded SystemsEmbedded systems are of vital economic importance and are literallybecoming ubiquitous .
They have already become an integral component ofsafety critical systems involving aviation , military , telecommunications , and process control applications .
Interest inembedded systems is growing further due to the expectation that theywill become a key component of many commonplace consumer appliances.Consumers will expect levels of reliability and predictabilityassociated with the very best brands of cars , televisions , andrefrigerators .
Glitches , crashes , and general erratic behavior of thesort seen with prior generations of consumer PC software products willbe unacceptable for these embedded applications .
It thus becomescrucial that these embedded software systems satisfy high levels ofcorrectness criteria , well above those of today 's large softwaresystems , which are often highly error-prone.Besides the requirement of a new standard of functional correctness , embedded systems pose additional challenges which were not fullyaddressed by previous validation and verification approaches .
Theseinclude adequate guarantees of timeliness , low or controlled powerconsumption , and low or controlled memory utilization .
With thespread of embedded systems , and the need to guarantee an acceptablelevel of functionality and reliability of the applications they areembedded in , the industry needs an effective and reliable developmentprocess .
Due to market constraints , such a process should also supporta fast turn-around time as well as enable the easy design of manycustomized variations of the same product.This project is developing the foundation for a seamless designprocess for embedded systems as described below .
In particular , it isdeveloping A formal visual language for requirements , including behavioral , temporal , and TPM constraints ; A methodology for the automatic synthesis of an executable specification from the requirement specification language ; A methodology for the verification of the intermediate and distributed representation of the systems against requirements ; A methododology for automatic code-distribution of specifications , possibly with some architectural constraints provided by the user ; A model for representing hardware/software co-design platforms that enables modeling of both loosely- and tightly-coupled components as well as compositional reasoning about them ; Algorithms for automatically generating architecture-optimized code from executable specifications ; Methods for translation validation of the generated code and run-time validation on the system using monitors ; The Design of a profiler process which analyzes machine code , computes the resulting figures for time , power , and memory , and back-associate these figures with their executable specification sources , enabling early-stage analysis of these requirements.The impact of the project is to streamline and significantlyaccelerate the time to market of embedded applications of both newproducts and revisions and customizations of existing product lines.Another impact is to upgrade the level of dependability andpredictability of embedded software to new standards , compatible andcomparable to those expected from the best brands of consumerproducts .
This proposal describes SLAM , a scalable network architecture integrating millions of real-world sensors with actuators and distributed software applications .
SLAM will enable a broad variety of novel monitoring and control applications including rapid disaster response , scalable crime detection and prevention , facilities maintenance , asset monitoring , and navigation .
SLAM solves three problems1 .
Full exploitation of a sensor 's data stream requires knowledge of contextual information , particularly location and time.2 .
Fine-grained monitoring of millions of assets and facilities requires the physical deployment of sensors in the environment an intensive and cumbersome manual task.3 .
Use of deployed sensors/actuators by distributed software applications requires network infrastructure.The SLAM architecture has three main components that address these issues1 .
Cricket , a ubiquitous and precise location infrastructure .
No current location-sensing technology works everywhere in all places and at all times .
Cricket is a novel multi-sensor location architecture to solve this problem , using a combination of RF and ultrasound indoors and at building perimeters , and GPS outdoors .
Cricket incorporates self-configuration algorithms and energy-efficient protocols for scalability and longevity .
2 .
An activated environment and efficient activation method .
SLAM requires that the subject environment be activated with sensors and actuators .
Without special attention , the activation process could become unmanageable due to the complexity of the environment .
Therefore SLAM provides virtual location-based tagging , typically for immobile objects .
The human installer affixes virtual tags to physical regions or objects by pointing at them with a Cricket-equipped handheld device , triggering an association of a unique identifier and the tagged entity 's location and other attributes in a persistent store .
This eases environment activation.3 .
A scalable network infrastructure connects sensor information and events to software handlers .
The network consists of fixed and mobile sensor proxies , physically co-located with the objects and events they monitor , to integrate location , identity , and temporal information to form an event stream .
Sensors and their proxies communicate using sensor-specific low-energy communication protocols .
Applications are written as event handlers distributed across the network .
SLAM provides support for dynamically distributing handlers across proxies and compute servers , routing events to handlers , and performing query processing operations .
The proposed SLAM architecture introduces three innovative ideas ubiquitous , energy-efficient location infrastructure ( drawing on ideas from beacon-based location systems , computational geometry , and wireless networking ) ; virtual region and object tagging for environment activation and asset management ( drawing on ideas from geometric modeling and database management systems ) ; and distributed proxy-based event and response processing ( drawing on ideas from networking and database systems ) .Starting with an existing environment ( a building , campus , or town ) , the operational model to put SLAM in place is as follows .
First , the location infrastructure is activated .
Location beacons are placed in the environment , and a digital representation of the environment is constructed , enabling location inference anywhere within the environment .
Second , the environment is activated .
Sensors and virtual and physical tags are affixed to objects of interest within the environment ( and environment representation ) .
Third , the SLAM network is activated , connecting raw sensordata streams to sensor proxies .
The proxies annotate sensor data streams with location and temporal information , and forward them to appropriate handlers via the event-processing network .
Handlers produce further events , as well as actions and notifications to be forwarded to actuators or humans.As a challenging test case , we plan to deploy SLAM on a large university campus with millions of interesting entities .
These include many sensors in offices , machine rooms , physical plant , and laboratories to monitor power , temperature , humidity , and pressure ; smoke and fire detectors ; burglar alarms and physical intrusion detection systems ; motion detectors ; monitors of leaks , floods , chemicals , and hazardous materials ; large-scale theft- and crime-prevention apparatus , and navigation aids .
The goal is to monitor the university 's physical assets and improve the personal safety of over ten thousand individuals moving in and around thousands of offices , labs , and common spaces in hundreds of buildings.The target SLAM system will focus initially on three capabilities at MIT with a variety of interested partners efficient facilities monitoring and maintenance ( with MIT Physical Plant ) ; scalable asset monitoring for inventory , crime prevention and detection ( with the MIT Property Office , MIT Campus Police , and MIT Libraries ) ; and navigation assistance , including both personal way-finding and pervasive active signage ( with the MIT Schedules Office and the MIT Safety Office ) .
ABSTRACT0205422Harrold , Mary JGA Tech Res Corp - GITTITLE Collaborative Research ITR Acquiring Accurate Dynamic Field Data Using Lightweight InstrumentationDynamic analyses , such as testing and profiling , play a key role in state-of-art approaches to software quality assurance ( QA ) .
With rare exception , these analyses are performed in-house , on developerplatforms , using developer-provided input workloads .
Shortcomings of this approach include that the results simply can not be trusted to tell us how the software actually performs in the field.The project goal is to give developers unprecedented insight into the actual runtime behavior of their software , allowing developers ( and ultimately the software itself ) to change , optimize , and adapt the software based on highly accurate field data .
Lightweight , collaborative dynamic analyses conducted around-the-world and around-the-clock form the new platform ( 1 ) lightly instrument fielded software ( i.e. , each program copy performs a small part of the analysis ) ( 2 ) collect the partial data from many instances of the software , fusing it to conduct the complete analysis , ( 3 ) change the running program instances based on the findings and ( 4 ) repeat the process.Seven critical research challenges form the core of the project 1 .
Lightweight instrumentation -- Develop instrumentation that is virtually transparent to individual users .
2 .
Compositional analysis techniques -- Develop distributed analysis techniques that decomposetraditional analyses into smaller steps , distribute the steps among multiple users , and then fuse each user 's results into an accurate solution to the original problem .
3 .
Scalability -- Develop storage and analysis techniques to deal with the high data volumes we expect to encounter .
4 .
Anomaly Detection -- Define data-driven techniques to automatically identify anomalous behaviors of deployed software .
5 .
Privacy and Security -- Incorporate privacy and security safeguards into our data collection and analysis approaches .
6 .
Dynamic updating mechanisms -- Develop techniques to make runtime changes to the location and function of instrumentation , and to parts of the software itself .
7 .
Validate approach on industrial software .
This project focuses on facilitating and augmenting social interaction in virtual environments , particularly immersive virtual environments .
Virtual environment technology allows individuals to freely move about digital worlds in real time observing and interacting with the environment and virtual others within it .
Increased sophistication of virtual environment technology and digital imaging of people promises a new age for technologically mediated social interaction of geographically separated individuals .
However , in order to implement such interaction virtually in meaningful and productive ways , an understanding of the parameters of people 's perceptions of each other 's non-verbal signals ( e.g. , facial expressions , gestures , gaze ) within virtual environments is necessary .
Such an understanding will provide a hierarchical taxonomy of the necessary and sufficient non-verbal signals that are critical to social interaction within virtual environments and , therefore , must be tracked and rendered among interactions in virtual environments .
Realizing the objectives of the proposed project will advance scientific understanding in the areas of social interaction and non-verbal behavior , human participation in collaborative virtual environments , and technological ( e.g. , computer vision ) aspects of automated tracking and rendering of human on-verbal signals .
AST 0205872GaustadDr .
John Gaustad , at Swarthmore College , recently completed a Southern H-Alpha Sky Survey Atlas ( SHASSA ) .
The images in this atlas have a resolution of 0.8 arcminutes and sensitivity of 2 rayleighs per pixel .
Dr. Gaustad will now use the same robotic camera system to obtain comparable images of the brighter H-alpha regions in an emission line of ionized sulfur ( SII ) .
The SII/H-alpha ratio is a useful discriminator between regions that are heated by the ultraviolet light of embedded stars and regions that are heated by supersonic shock waves produced by supernova remnants and stellar winds .
These measurements will contribute to understanding the astrophysical nature of ionized regions in the interstellar medium of the Galaxy .
*** 0205057RodgersThe International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad .
The program 's awards provide opportunities for joint research , and the use of unique or complementary facilities , expertise and experimental conditions abroad.This award will support a twenty-four month research fellowship by Dr. Kathryn D. Rodgers to work with Dr. Reinhard Fassler at Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry in Martinsreid , Germany.This project will provide valuable information about the different roles of proteoglycans in basement membrane development and how they compensate each other functionally .
The first goal is to cross heterozygous mice to generate agrin/perlecan knockouts to assess the roles of these proteins in development and to clarify the results from the single knockouts .
The second is to analyze whether perlecan expression has an effect on cartilege development and collagen fibril development .
The PI will generate mice expressing perlecan under control of the type II collagen promotor , and then to cross these mice with the perlecan-null mice .
Detailed EM-level analysis together with biochemical methods will be used to assess the collagens that are formed .
The third goal is to use Cre/loxP system to develop a mouse with a deleted IG3 module of domain IV of perlecan , as well as antibodies to detect the IG2/IG4 recombinant molecule .
This will address more specifically the portion of the perlecan molecule that has particular functions , with a great level of molecular detail.In addition to Dr. Fassler , the PI will work with Drs .
Rupert Timpl , Max Planck Institute , Anders Aspberg , Lund University in Lund , Sweden , and Peter Bruckner , Westfalische Wilhelms Universitat Munster , in Munster , Germany .
Mark P. Jones and Richard B. KieburtzCCR-0205737Advanced Programming Languages for Embedded SystemsOver the last few decades we have witnessed remarkable changes in the way that computers are both used and programmed .
For example , many of the computers in use today are hidden in embedded systems .
From everyday appliances -- -such as washing machines and televisions -- -to safety and security critical systems -- -such as vehicle navigation and control , defense applications , or medical devices -- -the use of embedded computers allows manufacturers to build systems with much greater flexibility , functionality , and sophistication than has ever been possible before.During the same time , new programming languages have been developed with features that increase developer productivity and allow the construction of produce more reliable and flexible systems .
For example , module systems help to manage the complexity of large projects , type systems can be used to detect bugs at compile-time , and automatic storage management techniques eliminate a common source of errors.In industry , however , much of the embedded software that is being developed today is still written using older languages , or lower-level assembly languages , without the benefits that modern languages can provide .
The problem is that the results and focus of recent programming language research have not been a good match for the challenges and context of embedded systems development .
As a result , where some might have expected embedded systems developers to embrace modern programming languages , it might seem instead that many have chosen to ignore them ! One source of problems arises from difficulties in capturing so-called non-functional aspects of behavior -- -such as execution time , power consumption , and adaptivity -- -that are critical requirements for many embedded systems .
Unfortunately , these are exactly the kinds of things that language designers have abstracted away from in the hope of increasing productivity and portability .
Other difficulties occur as the result of complicated treatments of features such as concurrency and event handling , which again play a central role in many embedded applications .
Significant bugs can occur if programmers do not adhere to a carefully worked out discipline of coding when they use such features , but there is very little that the underlying type system or semantics can do to help in detecting these problems.This project is working to bridge the gap between these two important fields , and to demonstrate how embedded systems development can benefit from and inform programming language research .
In particular , the project is focusing on the ongoing development and use of a high-level language called Timber that supports an implicit notion of concurrency , asynchronous communication , and non-blocking , reactive programming .
All of these features are directly relevant in the context of embedded systems design .
In addition , the project is developing new analysis and compilation techniques that enable non-functional aspects of behavior to be specified using high-level constraints and policies for graceful degradation .
Because they are specified at a high level , these constraints can continue to serve as meaningful descriptions of requiredbehavior , even as programs evolve to accommodate new functionality or to support new platforms .
The key to success is a declarative approach in which programmers focus on what is required , while compilers determine how it should be accomplished , using the results of analysis to guide the selection of an appropriate , low-level implementation strategy.With the transition from research to industry in mind , the project is focusing on tools for PC/104 systems , which is an industry standard and an important sector in today 's embedded systems market .
In the longer term , the project is contributing to shifts in attitude and beneficial changes in the role that programming language technology can plays in the delivery of more widespread , more flexible , more reliable , and more secure embedded systems .
Proposal Number DMS - 0205643 Investigator Emma Previato ep @ math.bu.edu Moduli spaces and differential equationsThis project combines projective geometry and differential algebra .
For a few decades now , moduli spaces of vector bundlesover curves have been prominent in mathematical physics .
A few interrelated open problems are the object of this research .
In projective space , models of moduli of vector bundles still do n't have explicit description , by equations or by classification .
The generalized theta functions ( sections of higher-rank vector bundles ) are not developed to the point that one can describe flows of completely integrable hierarchies or perform the necessary calculations of quantum field theory ( partition function , e.g .
) Finally , flows of commutative rings of partial differential operators ( generalized KP flows ) have not been described explicitly .
In the proposed work on the projective-geometry side , equations for moduli spaces of higher-rank bundles and dimensions of Brill-Noether loci will be calculated by methods of representation theory and correspondences between Grassmannians .
On the analytic side , differential equations for the Kleinian functions ( which generalize the Weierstrass p-function ) will be derived and applied to integrate new Hamiltonian systems and the generalized KP flows .
A theme that runs through the proposed research is the classical problem of reduction Weierstrass ' students Koenigsberger and Kowalevski , respectively , characterized the abelian integrals of genus 2 , 3 respectively , that reduce with multiplicity 2 to an elliptic integral ; since then , very little was found in general ( e.g. , higher genus or multiplicity ) .
Progress on this problem is now under way , partly due to results that revisit the Kleinianfunctions , and partly to the aid of computer algebra .
The problem of reduction is linked with the problem of curves with automorphisms , and the project includes applications of the results to differential Galois theory , monodromy of ordinary differential equations , and decoding algorithms for algebraic ( Goppa ) codes .
Elliptic functions have an unreasonable effectiveness , to borrow E.P .
Wigner 's phrase .
They occur when modeling harmonic oscillators , shooting billiards , measuring the amplitude of ocean waves , computing the partition functions of quantum field theory .
The word elliptic refers to the number of periods of the functions ( one over the real , two over the complex numbers ) .
Theta functions are the multi-periodic analog of elliptic functions .
Although Old Masters such as Klein , H.F. Baker and O. Bolza , obtained equations for genus-2 ( 4 complex periods ) theta functions , most properties of theta functions are still inexplicit , including their dependence on the period lattice .
New impetus in the study of such functions came from the theory of integrable PDEs , such as the Kadomtsev-Petviashvili equation , and the attendantalgebraically completely integrable systems that have been intensively studied since the 1970s .
This project will combine projective geometry and differential algebra to identify differential equations satisfied by the ( Kleinian ) theta functions , and apply them to find exact solutions of Hamiltonian systems and non-linear PDEs.At the same time the project will pursue the other major , non-abelian generalization of theta functions , by embedding moduli spaces into projective space .
Theta functions that can be reduced to expressions in elliptic functions will be characterized geometrically and used in effective decoding algorithms .
This project brings together two disciplines , computer science and artificial intelligence on the one hand , and economics and game theory on the other , and by doing so addresses some fundamental problems of computing in the Internet era .
Some of the problems addressed are rooted directly in today 's Internet applications How do you charge for network usage so as to smooth out peaks in the demand ?
How do you incent people to contribute personal information and recommendations in recommender systems and discretionary databases ?
While this project is motivated by its potential application to electronic commerce , the focus is on foundational matters .
Computing in the Internet era means computing in the context of multiple self-interested entities , which in turn means that reasoning about computing must take the incentives of these entities into account .
This , in turn , calls for a fundamental integration of ideas from computer science ( such as fault tolerance , fairness , verification , algorithms , complexity , graphical models of uncertainty , machine learning ) with elements of game theory ( such as mechanism design , equilibrium analysis , game representations , learning , and agency theory ) .
The outcome is expected to benefit electronic commerce , but also more fundamentally to help lay the foundations for a new area of research called non-cooperative computing .
This project will develop a new , integrative theory of software problem management by studying softwareproblems in their ongoing sociotechnical contexts .
The researchers willcomparatively analyze large bodies ( gigabytes ) of longitudinalproblem-report data from open-source software development projects such as networked computer games , Internet/Web infrastructure , X-ray astronomy/deep space imaging , and academic software research , using grounded-theory and automated concept , data , and text-miningmethods .
The project will analyze instances of ( mis- ) alignment between software artifacts , problem episodes , problem-management activities , problem-management infrastructure , and underlying socialorganization .
Explanatory models will be built by linking patterns of ( mis- ) alignment among these elements to outcomes such as ease-of-repair , persistence of problems , amount of information exchanged , kinds of skills needed , and structure of social organization .
The resulting models can guide the development of newtools , infrastructures , and organizational practices for software .
They will also provide new perspectives on community-wide practices of capturing and managing knowledge .
This research will provide a conceptual shift in understanding how system development and use are bound together with the richness , variety , and temporal evolution of the socio-technical contexts provided by the global software industry .
AST-0205518LacyWith previous NSF support , Dr. John Lacy , at the University of Texas , developed the Texas Echelon Cross Echelle Spectrograph ( TEXES ) .
TEXES can be used in several modes high resolution cross-dispersed , low to medium resolution long-slit , and source-acquisition imaging .
It operates in the 5-25 micrometer spectral region .
TEXES 's high resolution capabilities are unique .
No other mid-infrared astronomical spectrograph has a comparable combination of resolution and sensitivity .
TEXES is operated by the instrument team , but is available to all members of the astronomical community .
Observational projects to be carried out by Dr. Lacy and colleagues with this award include studies of molecular gas in star-formation regions , ionized gas in ultracompact HII regions , molecules in protoplanetary disks , and molecules in planetary atmospheres .
Infrared spectroscopy provides several unique probes of interstellar molecules , notably the abilityto study molecules like C2H2 and CH4 without permanent dipole moments .
Initial observationswith TEXES of C2H2 and HCN in the KL star-formation region in Orion show the lines to consistof multiple narrow components indicative of fine-scale clumping of the gas .
Further observationswill provide information about the interaction of a protostellar wind with surrounding gas , as wellas measurements of the abundances of several molecules showing the influence of star formation onmolecular cloud chemistry .
Six regions of high-mass star formation will be studied .
Ultracompact HII regions are prominent sign-posts of young , very massive stars , but their structure and especially their longevity is not well understood .
Infrared ionic fine-structure lines have significant advantages over other probes of such obscured ionized gas in that they provide information about abundances , physical conditions , and kinematics without the large thermal broadening of hydrogen lines .
A survey of ultracompact H II regions of various morphologies will be carried out with the goal of distinguishing among different models of these objects .
In contrast to near-infrared and millimeter observations , mid-infrared spectroscopy of gas disks around young stars probes the 1-10 AU planet-forming region .
Lines of H2 , H2O , and possibly C2H2 and NH3 should be observable with TEXES , although initial observations appear to contradict conclusions from spectra taken with the ISO satellite .
If line Doppler profiles can be measured , they will provide information on the distribution of molecules with radius in the disks , perhaps showing the signature of forming planets .
Mid-infrared spectroscopy is probably the most important probe of the atmospheres of the giant planets .
Most of their emitted radiation is in the mid-infrared , and their molecular constituents have their spectral signatures in the mid-infrared .
TEXES will be used for a variety of planetary studies , with current plans concentrating on stratospheric molecules and atmospheres of moons .
*** This research program will focus on singular martingale problems and stochastic differential equations , particle representations for stochastic partial differential equations and measure-valued processes , and spatial point processes .
The work on singular martingale problems and related stochastic equations addresses fundamental questions regarding the specification , transformation and approximation of the models .
Applications to controlled stochastic networks motivate much of the work .
Particle representations provide a powerful tool for understanding the behavior of complex stochastic processes .
Work to be performed will extend the range of applicability of these methods , develop new constructions of particle representations , and address problems of existence and uniqueness of solutions of the stochastic equations underlying these representations .
Application of the results to filtering and to theoretical models in finance will provide both useful intuition and a check on the appropriateness of the theoretical developments .
Spatial point processes characterized as stationary distributions of Markov birth and death processes and as solutions of stochastic equations driven by Poisson random measures will be studied .
The work will focus on spatial ergodicity and central limit theorems with applications to parameter estimation in mind .
The study of stochastic processes is concerned with mathematical descriptions of natural phenomena governed by random or chance mechanisms .
Mathematical models of such phenomena may attempt to describe variation in time , in space , or both .
The research to be performed is concerned with developing methods for specifying these mathematical models , approximating complex models by simpler ones , obtaining information about the true state of a system from corrupted or noisy observations , and determining how to influence or control the evolution of the models and the phenomena they represent .
Motivating examples include models for the effects on asset prices of the valuations assigned by a large number of traders and for communication and computer networks .
AST 0205964Peterson , B MThis program will explore the very inner structure of active galactic nuclei , to determine masses of the central black holes using continuum and emission-line variability to probe the physical processes in the accretion-disk/broad-line region environment .
The current program in progress to measure the bulge velocity dispersions in the host galaxies of active galactic nuclei will be expanded to test whether the relationship between the black-hole mass and bulge velocity dispersion is the same for active galaxies and quiescent galaxies .
This relationship will be used to estimate masses for local AGNs for which reverberation masses have not been measured , concentrating initially on radio-loud AGNs and narrow-line Seyfert 1 galaxies , objects that are not well represented in reverberation-mapped samples .
Optical ground-based support for multiwavelength monitoring programs will be provided , in particular a long-standing program of optical spectrophotometry on the well-studied Seyfert 1 galaxy NGC 5548 .
EIA- 0205502Peter ShaneCarnegie Mellon U. ITR Developing and Testing A High Telepresence Virtual Agora For Broad Citizen Participation A Multi-Trait , Multi-Method InvestigationThis grant will support research related to citizen learning and participation in communities and government using Internet-based information technologies and tools .
This is a multidisciplinary proposal with participants from Public Policy and Management , Philosophy , Political Science , Social Psychology and Computer Science .
A variety of free software will be developed to foster collaborative information sharing , structured discussions and community decision-making through shared data , chat sessions , video conferencing and other information modes .
The software is not an end in itself , but rather will serve to support research by the PIs addressing some of the well-known problems of computer-mediated communications , such as poor transmission of social cues , usability , accountability , and access inequalities .
These problems will be studied within two larger contexts , Community Effects and Decisions Quality Effects , and two levels of physical community , on-campus , and off-campus ( but still within the Pittsburgh local community ) .
The software will be robustly built and intended for broad use beyond the project itself .
The information age is built on software .
Web browsers and servers , office productivity tools , anti-lock brake systems , cellular telephones , and online trading systems are all implemented in software .
Most of that code is prepared for execution using a compiler.For four decades , compilers have applied a fixed sequence of transformations to the code .
The fact that different transformations , applied in different orders , can produce different results has been known , but the techniques for picking effective transformation sequences have not .
The computational power available with modern processors makes it possible to experimentally discover good transformation orders.This project will systematically explore the problems of choosing transformation sequences .
This five-year program will develop practical techniques for building adaptive compilers - compilers that change their behavior in response to the input program and the end-user 's stated goals for optimization .
This will require experimentation , algorithm development , application of techniques from machine learning , and basic software engineering .
This project will produce the tools , techniques , and insights needed to make adaptive compilation both practical and productive .
The resulting compilers will give users greater control over the run-time characteristics of their programs and will reduce the performance variability that plagues compiled code today .
AST 0205960WestUnderstanding the origin and evolution of galaxies is one of the major goals of modern astrophysics .
It is generally believed that galaxies arose from small density fluctuations in the primordial matter distribution that were amplified over time by gravity .
However , our knowledge of the details of the galaxy formation process is still far from complete , and many important questions remain unanswered .
How and when did galaxies form ?
How have they evolved over time ?
How do their environs influence galaxy properties ?
Over the past few years , Dr. Michael West has been pursuing a number of original lines of research , both observational and theoretical , to address these questions .
With this award he will build upon previous successes and explore new avenues that may lead to further insights about the genesis of galaxies .
Specific goals of this project include the following o One of the most promising ways to learn the secrets of galaxy formation is by studying their globular cluster populations .
Globular clusters are dense aggregates of up to a million stars that are held together by their mutual gravitational attraction .
Most galaxies are surrounded by systems of tens , hundreds , or thousands of globular clusters that swarm around them like bees around a hive .
The present-day globular populations of galaxies reflect the cumulative effects of billions of years of ongoing galaxy formation and evolution via mergers and collisions , accretion , generations of star formation , and other processes .
Careful analysis of a galaxy 's globular cluster population can thus allow astronomers to reconstruct its history .
A major goal of Dr. West 's project is to undertake the most comprehensive study yet of the globular cluster systems of hundreds of galaxies in the Virgo and Coma clusters .
o Dr. West and collaborators recently found evidence of the existence of a sizeable population of intergalactic globular clusters that are not gravitationally bound to individual galaxies but instead roam freely throughout the cores of galaxy clusters .
The discovery of this new class of objects is an exciting result that invites further study , and searches for intergalactic globulars in several nearby galaxy clusters are currently underway .
The colors , luminosity function , and spatial and velocity distributions of these intergalactic globulars will place strong constraints on their origin .
o A growing body of evidence suggests that galaxy destruction might be a much more common occurrence than previously thought , and that the births and deaths of galaxies are intertwined .
Rich galaxy clusters are especially harsh environments , where small galaxies can be cannibalized by larger ones , collisions between galaxies can strip material from their halos , ablation removes their interstellar gas , and galaxies may be partially or even completely torn apart by tidal fields as they travel through the cluster core .
Yet the demise of some galaxies may also give rise to new ones , as material spilled into intergalactic space is eventually recycled into other galaxies .
A goal of this research project is to conduct the first systematic survey to look for the faint remains of disrupted galaxies in galaxy clusters , in order to place quantitative constraints on the current rate of galaxy destruction in dense environments .
This award is made under the auspices of the Research at Undergraduate Institutions ( RUI ) program at the NSF .
*** This individual investigator award will support a project to investigate the complex dynamics of glassy systems using scanning probe microscopy .
In particular fluctuations on nanometer length scales of dielectric and visco-elastic properties as a function of frequency , time , position , electric field , and temperature in polymers and super-cooled liquids will be studied .
The goals of the work are to probe individual cooperatively-rearranging-regions ( CRR ) , to understand their structure , detailed dynamics , and their role in glassy phenomena .
In addition , nonequilibrium fluctuations will be investigated in aging glassy materials .
Theoretical work has predicted that the fluctuation-dissipation-relation will be violated in a model-dependent way in slowly relaxing systems such as glasses .
The experiments will investigate the frequency , temperature , and aging-time dependences of these violations in super-cooled liquids and polymers , and thereby constrain theories of the glass transition and aging and advance our understanding of nonequilibrium statistical mechanics .
The graduate students involved in this research will be trained in skills that will enable them to pursue future careers in academe or the high-technology industries .
In addition , through undergraduate-research-fellowships , cooperative-education , and experiential-education programs , undergraduates will participate in this research , gaining valuable nanoscience experience and preparing them to contribute to important nanotechnologies of the future.When studying the properties of a material by probing ultra-small regions ( nearly as small as a molecule ) , it has been found that properties such as hardness , elasticity , or electrical conductivity can vary considerably from nano-region to nano-region or with time .
As nanotechnology is developed over the next few years , these variations will be increasingly important to understand .
Nano-properties are also key to a fundamental understanding of disordered materials .
Materials such as glass , polymers ( plastics ) , and some metal alloys are called disordered because their molecules are randomly arranged .
This individual investigator award will support a project to use advanced scanning probe microscopy techniques to investigate nano-property variations in disordered materials .
These studies will advance our understanding of this important but poorly understood class of materials .
The graduate students involved in this research will be trained in skills that will enable them to pursue future careers in academe or the high-technology industries .
In addition , through undergraduate-research-fellowships , cooperative-education , and experiential-education programs , undergraduates will participate in this research , gaining valuable nanoscience experience and preparing them to contribute to important nanotechnologies of the future .
EIA- 0205111Eduard Hovy Information Sciences Institute , USCThis grant will explore the automated construction of domain ontologies across governmental datasets .
There are many data silos in government ; that is , collections of data which can not be cross-compared or queried .
This is a major problem in presenting government information to consumers which is tailored according to their interests , rather than according to the organizational structure of government agencies .
While such automated tools can not completely construct accurate ontologies , they can take much of the labor intensiveness out of such efforts , particularly where the number of terms or variables is so large ( in the thousands ) as to prevent manual efforts .
Working with the US Environmental Protection Agency , which has many datasets of interest to the public , the research team will develop a semi-automated toolkit to aid in the construction of ontologies .
Taha , WalidCCR-0205542ITR A Framework for Rapid Development of Reliable Robotics SoftwareRobots are entering daily life .
Commercially available systems aredelivering medication to patients in hospitals , mowing lawns , vacuumingfloors , and finding wide applications in the entertainment industry .
In the future , they will play a more substantial role in areas such as space exploration , health care , and search and rescue .
But asthese applications grow , so does the complexity of these robots , makingthe reliability of their software and the productivity of theirprogrammers a priority .
It is not clear that current techniques forprogramming robots are sufficient for building systems that are orders of magnitude more complex than the ones available today .
The vast majority of programming methods in current use focus on high-level planning and task and behavioral aspects .
By contrast , there are no widely-accepted specialized software processes or programming languages for the integrated development of robotics applications.This project explores the impact of state-of-the-art programming languages techniques in a small-scale robotics setting .
The project applies domain-specific languages methods and automatic program generation techniques .
The framework exploits core technologies such as multi-stage programming with simple , high-level annotationsto avoid unnecessary runtime overheads yet provide a natural and algorithmic approach to program generation , where generation occurs in a first stage , and the execution of the synthesized program occurs in a second stage .
Because ( even when the final goal is embedded software ) the first stage does not need to be resource-bounded , conventional programming techniques can be used .
The challenge , then , becomes ensuring that the generated programs are suitable for execution on an embedded platform .
Multi-stage languages already provide significant safety guarantees .
For example , a program generator written in such a language not only is type-safe in the traditional sense , but we are guaranteed that any generated program will also be type safe .
This provides a noteworthy degree of assurance about the quality of the generated code .
But like most traditional high-level programming techniques , multi-stage programming was designed to satisfy functional requirements rather than operational ones , and existing multi-stage languages do not provide any guarantees about the behavior of programs in the presence of bounded resources .
The focus of this project is ways to address this problem by strengthening `` traditional '' multi-stage type systems using a number of state-of-the-art techniques from type theory and functional reactive programming ( FRP ) to create resource-aware multi-stage programming .
Linear and alias types ( in conjunction with dependent typing ) will be used to ensure space-boundedness , new typing techniques are used to ensure time-boundedness , and signals and behaviors from FRP allow for a natural style of reactive programming .
PROJECT SUMMARYLand-use change and alterations of plant diversity and composition have been shown toinfluence ecosystem processes .
Until recently , however , there has been little evaluation ofthe role of microbial community changes in mediating process change .
Shifts in land-useand plant diversity may alter the composition , and thus collective physiology , of soilmicrobial communities , leading to differences in process rates .
To understand more fullythe factors that influence microbial communities and their functioning , our researchaddresses the following questions 1 ) Does plant diversity and/or land-use influence soilmicrobial community composition ?
2 ) Do these changes in microbial compositioninfluence nutrient cycling rates ?
We are addressing these questions using an experimentin Costa Rica that manipulates plant community composition and diversity as well as aset of land-use sites , including forest and pasture .
To address the first question , we areexamining microbial community composition using phospholipid fatty acid analysis ( PLFA ) and terminal restriction fragment length polymorphisms ( T-RFLP ) .
PLFA datasuggest that microbial communities differ significantly across plant diversity and land-use gradients .
We request funds to proceed to the crucial second question and test , usingcontrolled laboratory experiments , whether soils with distinct microbial communitiesdiffer in two critical ecosystem functions nitrification and litter decomposition .
Prop # 0205168PI Thomas SmithThis award will supply shipboard scientific support equipment for the research vessel Alpha Helix operated by the University of Alaska and dedicated to use in support of marine research .
The Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment Program provides funds for ship equipment deemed essential to the proper and safe conduct of ocean science research .
The Program provides support for such items as deck equipment including winch systems for the deployment and retrieval of scientific instruments , navigational equipment such as radars , gyroscopes and earth satellite receivers to pin point the location of research sites , communication equipment including radio transceivers and satellite transceivers for voice and scientific data communications and other equipment such as motorized workboats for transporting scientists to and from data retrieval sites .
The Project Director , Thomas Smith is fully qualified to direct this project having had considerable experience in overseeing the acquisition and installation of shipboard equipment .
This project will allow the institution to acquire a replacement anchor chain , radar , Iridium Satellite Telephone system , and INMARSAT B Satellite communications system .
*** ITR Beyond Polygons and Pixels New Paradigms for Real-Time , Physically-Based RenderingThe ultimate goal of this research proposal is to provide real-time , physically accurate synthetic images , delivering breakthrough realism at fully interactive rates .
We will achieve this by combining new approaches for parallel graphics rendering with advanced , feature-level psychophysical models of human vision and new image representations .
Currently , the two extremes of image synthesis are physically-based rendering , where accurate simulation of light reflection gives faithful predictions of the appearance of scenes , and real-time rendering , where crude approximations to accurate simulation are tolerated to provide dynamic imagery at interactive rates .
High-quality , physically accurate images incorporating indirect lighting , inter-reflections between surfaces , and color bleeding can take hours or even days to compute on today 's workstations , and incremental improvements to the speed of rendering will not be enough to bridge the gap .
We estimate that real-time simulations of global illumination for complex scenes might require 10 7 times more processing power than we have on multi-processor workstations today .
This can only be achieved by taking a radically different approach to how we generate , encode , and display synthetic images , an approach that separates computation by light reflection components and is based on advanced psychophysical models of human vision and new image representations.Low-cost , efficiently pipelined graphics accelerator boards have become extremely popular , but these architectures only process local illumination components , and thus can not provide global illumination effects or guarantee physical accuracy .
To address this shortcoming , we have developed new algorithms that exploit the speed of these accelerator boards for direct lighting while performing global illumination computations in parallel on clusters of off-the-shelf Intel microprocessors .
We have reduced computation times from hours to minutes for complex environments , but for real-time image synthesis we need another four orders of magnitude speed-up.To reach this goal , we must develop more advanced models of human visual perception.Current perceptually-driven rendering methods are based on threshold models of human vision that predict the limits of our abilities to discriminate luminance contrasts , spatial patterns , motions , and colors , but provide no guidance for optimizing the order or precision of rendering operations .
For our new perception oracles , we are developing higher-level visual models to monitor the importance of scene features such as shadows and reflections to perceived image quality .
These new models will then drive the allocation of parallel computing resources as well as select appropriate algorithms to provide the steepest ascent solutions .
New data structures for pictorial representation will incorporate illumination and contrast gradients as well as pixel-by-pixel intensities to ensure optimal display of physically accurate and perceptually indistinguishable solutions under all viewing conditions .
These capabilities will extend the scientific , educational , and commercial application of graphical simulations into visually critical tasks where predictive reliability and speed are paramount .
The Internet is large , decentralized , and heterogeneous in its technology , administration and capacity .
The core of the Internet 's success arises from its adherence to a number of architectural principles , central to which is the notion that the network should try to achieve a robust , very often works pretty well level of performance .
One of the main techniques for achieving this across a wide range of conditions is making Internet protocols and mechanisms adaptive , so that they self-tune to work reasonably well in whatever circumstances they find themselves.This approach has been extremely successful .
However , some of the mechanisms , designed to be good enough across a large range of conditions , must now or will soon operate in regimes beyond their effective dynamic range .
For example , TCP congestion control mechanisms require revisiting for tomorrow 's Internet , both the coming high speed paths , and the coming low speed paths ( e.g. , lossy wireless links ) .
Similarly , the architecture 's ability to gracefully tolerate failures does not extend to new forms of failures , such as misconfigured routing information or malfunctioning middle-boxes , nor to distributed stresses , such as flash crowds , rapidly-spreading worms , or denial-of-service ( DoS ) floods.If we view robustness as the ability of the network to function well over a wide spectrum of conditions particularly given a very large , ever-growing and ever-changing network then we argue that the robustness of the future Internet is clearly at risk .
In this proposal , we emphasize a multifaceted approach to robustness1 ) Robust performance in the presence of extreme environments such as very high speed and highly variable delay , which requires rethinking today 's congestion control mechanisms.2 ) Robust performance in the presence of new forms of failure , both at the network layer , in terms of robust routing , and at the application layer , in terms of coping with the now widespread deployment of middleboxes that have elbowed their way into the architecture .
This will require investigating broader notions of fault inference.3 ) Robust performance in the presence of distributed stresses , both malicious ( denial-of-service floods ; congestion control cheaters ) and merely teeming ( flash crowds ) .
This will require an understanding of the network 's topology and the makeup of traffic aggregates , coupled with new control mechanisms deployed inside the network.Part of the approach to these is to refine existing protocols and mechanisms , and investigate new ones .
But the researchers also emphasize achieving robust performance by detecting incipient failures , on both short time scales ( via distributed operational monitoring ) and long time scales ( via diagnostic probing of deployed protocol implementations ) .While certainly these topics do not address the full range of challenges facing the Internet architecture , they do address some of the core issues in preserving and enhancing the Internet 's robustness .
In one sense , the proposed research is conservative , in that we frame it in terms of working within the current Internet architecture , rather than advocating a clean sheet approach .
The researchers argue , however , that in some ways this conservative approach makes for research that is more fundamental rather than less .
The clean sheet approach , while more tidy and much more conducive to easy exploration of basic principles , misses the crucial reality of how different mechanisms wind up interacting once integrated into a truly large-scale network .
AST-0205972OstrikerSeveral lines of observational and theoretical evidence suggest that giant molecular clouds ( GMCs ) have short lifetimes , forming and dissociating within a few tens of millions of years .
Prevailing theoretical arguments favor instability mechanisms in spiral arms to form GMCs , but existing work has suffered from technical limitations , and has not previously directly demonstrated that condensations with the properties of GMCs indeed form .
Dr. Eve Ostriker , at the University of Maryland , will lead an investigation of a series of linear stability analyses , nonlinear numerical simulations , and supporting diagnostics to address outstanding questions concerning GMC formation in spiral galaxies .
The modeling will include several important technical innovations .
These researchers will , for the first timeo Use direct numerical simulations to study development of the Parker instability in 3D with realistic rotational shear self-consistent with large-scale density gradients through arm and interarm regions of galaxies , also incorporating self-gravity to study linear and nonlinear coupling of Parker and Jeans modes ; o Comprehensively survey , using spectral methods , shearing-wavelet integrations , and magneto-hydrodynamic ( MHD ) simulations , the potential effects of the magnetorotational instability in galactic disks , focusing on coupling to self-gravitating modes in both secular-growth and saturated-state regimes ; o Incorporate a realistic multi-phase gaseous medium for the initial conditions in two and three- dimensional simulations of self-gravitating and magnetically-driven galactic disk instabilities ; o Directly confront stochastic coagulation vs. collective instability mechanisms for forming GMC-scale condensations by performing controlled experiments of multiphase evolution with and without self-gravity and magnetic effects.As GMC formation is intimately coupled to star formation , and the cold ISM is the most dynamically-responsive component of a disk galaxy , the results of this project will have broad impacts on both Galactic and extragalactic astronomical research , with implications for understanding the global regulation of star formation and the structure and evolution of spiral galaxies across the Hubble sequence .
*** Proposal # 0205128PI Mark LeviInstitution Penn State UniversityTitle Nonlinear Dynamics with Applications to Physical SystemsABSTRACTThis project consists of three parts .
The first part deals with a fundamental theoretical question of dynamics To understand the nature of physically observable chaos .
Despite the great amount of work done over the past five decades , the fundamental question of demonstrating genuine chaotic behavior in a physically realistic differential equation has not been answered .
The answer seems finally within grasp , due to incremental progress in understanding two-dimensional mappings on the one hand and some new insights into differential equations on the other .
The second part of the project deals with rapidly vibrating systems .
High-frequency oscillations lead to fascinating phenomena , which have found their use in such areas as particle confinement , particle accelerators , and laser tweezers .
A recent observation of the author shed a new light on these phenomena and opened connections with other fields , which will be further explored in this project , along with possible new applications .
The third part of the project deals with the mathematical analysis of a geometrical object ( a class of area-preserving cylinder maps ) which is of independent mathematical interest on the one hand and gives insight into physical systems on the other .
These systems include ( i ) charged particles in magnetic fields , ( ii ) the Frenkel-Kontorova model of an equilibrium configuration of electrons in a crystal lattice , and ( iii ) arrays of Josephson junctions.This project involves three different research directions .
The first direction addresses a major gap in our understanding of how chaos really manifests itself in physical systems .
Surprising as it may seem , despite the large amount of sometimes deep work in the field of chaos , chaotic behavior has not been proven ( understood in the mathematical sense ) in realistic physical systems .
The nature of chaos has really been understood only in mathematical models that are too simplified to include some key features of real systems ( although even those simplified models can be quite complex ) .
The theory , however , has reached a level where such understanding seems finally within grasp .
A mathematical proof of the existence of chaos for a realistic physical system would be the culmination of a long development over the past five decades or more .
The second direction of the project deals with the study of physical systems with rapid oscillations , where phenomena occur that are both utterly fascinating and useful .
For example , subjecting the end of an open bicycle chain to high-frequency vibrations will , in theory , enable the chain to stand up stably ( !
) on its end .
The theory which underlies this curiosity is also responsible for the workings of such seemingly unrelated devices as particle traps , particle accelerators , laser tweezers ( which allow one to move a particle inside a cell by a laser beam without breaking the cell wall ) , and acoustic levitators .
Over the past few years , the author has found an explanation of these effects ; prior theory predicted the result but did not answer the why .
The explanation opened new directions , which we plan to explore further .
We plan , in particular , to better understand the concept of vibrational control and explore the use of vibration for filtering ( using acoustic waves ) .
The third direction is of basic mathematical interest but has significance in several physical situations .
The mathematical theory will give insight , otherwise inaccessible , into at least three different phenomena ( i ) the behavior of particles in magnetic fields of certain patterns ; ( ii ) the electric conductivity of certain types of crystals , and ( iii ) the electric behavior of some arrays of Josephson junctions known as superconducting quantum interference devices ( the so-called SQUIDS ) .
Most studies of the behavior and biology of extinct primates rely upon the examination of the size and external features of fossil material .
Often overlooked is the information that can be derived from the analysis of the microscopic structure of bone .
The benefits of the latter approach , evidenced for example in the recent dinosaur literature , are particularly great where fossil materials are incomplete , as is usually the case .
Despite this tremendous potential , studies of mammalian bone microstructure are rare .
This project provides a much needed foundation regarding microstructural variability among the living primates .
Four bone microstructural features are examined in the long bones from 10 living primate species , and several other relevant mammals .
Each of these features - visible when thin cross-sections of bone are observed under a microscope - has been linked to bone strength in locomotion and/or aspects of life-history ( the schedule by which animals grow , reproduce , and die ) .
The intent is first to observe and describe existing variation .
But , more importantly , the study is designed to identify the factors that may be driving this microstructural variability ( body size , locomotory patterns , etc. ) .
Once the relationship between these factors and the microstructural features is elucidated , several fossil primates , selected for their relevance to the understanding of early primate evolution , will be examined .
It is expect that the microstructural investigation will illuminate previously obscure aspects of the biology and behavior of these extinct animals.This research constitutes one of several ongoing projects in the Hard Tissue Research Unit at Hunter College , City University of New York .
As a whole , the laboratory is generating a database of information with applications to anthropology and to the study of vertebrate skeletons in general .
These data are additionally relevant to the clinically-oriented bone biology field ; all bone is not like human bone , and an appreciation of the variability that exists provides the context within which human bone structure and function is understood .
Finally , new methods developed in the course of the study will become available to the community of bone biologists and comparative morphologists at PROPOSAL ABSTRACTScalable Molecular Electronics We are approaching the end of a remarkably successful era in computing The era where Moore 's Law reigns , where processing power per dollar doubles every year .
This success is based in large part on advances in complementary metal-oxide semiconductor ( CMOS ) -based integrated circuits .
Although we have come to expect , and plan for , the exponential increase in processing power in our everyday lives , today Moore 's Law faces imminent challenges both from the physics of deep-submicron CMOS devices and from the enormous costs of chip masks and next-generation fabrication plants .
A promising alternative to CMOS-based computing being investigated is chemically assembled electronic nanotechnology ( CAEN ) .
Electronic nanotechnology ( EN ) constructs electronic circuits out of nanometer-scale devices that take advantage of quantum-mechanical effects .
The fundamental strategy of CAEN is to substitute compilation time ( which is inexpensive ) for manufacturing precision ( which is ex-pensive ) .
The research will be directed at integrating defect measurements with computer architecture and compiler technology to create circuits from chemically assembled structures .
Using EN to build computer systems requires new ways of thinking about computing devices ; spanning everything from circuits to compilers .
Unlike conventional CMOS , CAEN can not be used to construct complex structures .
Instead , one fabricates dense regular ( but potentially defective ) structures , which we call nanoFabrics , that can be programmed after fabrication to implement complex circuits .
The proposed research investigates how to scale CAEN to create useful computational devices with more than 10^10 gate-equivalents per cm^2 by developing new circuit technology , reconfigurable computing , defect tolerance , architectural abstractions and innovative compiler technology While the researchers will not be designing the EN devices themselves , their goal is to show how they can be used to create computing devices and guide EN scientists in their development of the underlying technology .
The investigators approach this problem at four levels Logical Building Blocks The researchers will develop models of EN devices and new circuit simulation technology that will allow predictions of performance across important metrics such as power , speed , density , area , and delay .
These models will be used to design and determine the characteristics of logical circuit building blocks , nanoBlocks , for computing systems .
Manufacturing Due to the nature of EN and specifically CAEN fabrication , the devices will have defects .
The investigators will develop methods which will allow systems based on EN devices to transparently work in the presence of such defects .
Computer Architecture The researchers will develop a hierarchy of abstract machines that support re-configurable computing and hide complexity .
A split-phase abstract machine ( SAM ) will be used to partition programs into processes , which will be mapped to an abstract machine composed of tiles arranged on a 2-D grid .
Each tile will contain four components a finite state machine , a data path segment , a local memory , and a router .
Tiles may be grouped together into a complete pipelined datapath .
The tiles themselves will be implemented in nanoBlocks , the basic unit of the nanoFabric .
Compilation Compilation technology will be developed to map programs written in general-purpose programming languages , e.g .
C or Java , to nanoFabrics .
The research will focus on ensuring that the compiler will scale to nanoFabrics , which can have hundreds of millions of components .
The compiler decomposes an application into a series of independent SAMs based on control flow and memory access patterns .
They are developing a new intermediate representation with a precise semantics that turns all control flow into data flow .
The IR unifies predication , speculation and static-single assignment and makes explicit data flow , control flow , and synchronization .
This leads to an enormous simplification of many optimizations and provides the framework for formal translation and optimization validation of the compiler .
This research has the potential to utilize , and guide the development of , electronic nanotechnology to inexpensively produce low-power circuits a million times more dense than conventional CMOS circuits .
National Geographic Television , in Collaboration with Graphic Films , is producing a 40-minute , large-format , documentary film about the scientific quest to understand some of the most dramatic geological and meteorological events we experience -- volcanoes , earthquakes and violent storms .
The goals of the film are to inform audiences about geological and meteorological forces which greatly impact our planet , present the scientific research being performed in an effort to understand and predict these forces , portray scientific role models and to stimulate a greater appreciation and interest in the Earth sciences .
Informal education outreach will includeA Forces of Nature website that will include educational resources targeted to the general audience as well as to students and teachers.Museum and Family Activity GuidesThe National Geographic Society will support public programs at science-technology centers by providing access to scientists who work in the areas of science covered in the film.National Geographic 's cable program Explorer ( carried on MSNBC ) will produce a themed show around Forces of Nature to coincide with the launch of the film.A companion bookIn addition , outreach materials for formal education will includeA Forces of Nature Teacher 's GuideA teacher training seminar to be conducted at the first 20 theaters in the U.S. that lease the filmWorkshops at the national conferences of the National Science Teachers Association , the National Council for the Social Studies and the National Council for Geographic Education.Instructional information in National Geographic for Kids , the classroom magazine for elementary school students in grades 3-6.The Executive Producer for the film will be Lisa Truitt .
George Casey will be the Producer/Director .
The Lead Science Advisors are Stephen Schneider , Professor of Environmental Biology and Global Change , Stanford University ; James Shymansky , Professor of Science Education , University of Missouri-St. Louis ; and James Walker , Professor Emeritus , Space Physics Research Lab , Department of Atmospheric , Oceanic and Space Science , University of Michigan .
The River Project provides an opportunity for high school students in Manhattan , New York , to become directly involved in the study of urban wildlife , habitats and water quality .
Each year 50 students will participate in an internship for up to100 hours under the supervision of professional scientists and graduate students .
Previous projects have included fish occurrence and distribution , inventory and monitoring , uptake route of pollutants in tomcod , water quality monitoring , etc .
Students learn techniques for observation , recording , manipulating and analyzing data , species identification and field methods .
Students are trained to use scientific instrumentation and laboratory equipment , including computers for data analysis and presentations .
Participants are also trained to conduct interpretive tours of the Estuarium and interact with the public while describing the facility and research in which they are involved .
At the conclusion of this three-year project , 150 students from Manhattan will have participated in this program .
ABSTRACTThe establishment of unlicensed communication bands has successfully encouraged innovation , most recently in wireless devices and infrastructure that use unlicensed spectrum to provide connections to the Internet .
A key aspect of Internet usage is an almost unlimited capacity for growth .
For unlicensed wireless , the transition from 11 Mb/s 802.11b to 54 Mb/s 802.11a marks the start of an industry race toward ever-higher data rates .
The combination of increasing data rates and a proliferation of devices could easily lead to inefficiency in the use of unlicensed spectrum due to a combination of overuse and failure to develop mechanisms for efficient sharing of this resource .
While the overload of any finite band may be inevitable , this project is addressing the increase in capacity of the available unlicensed bands as much as possible , and is developing approaches that can predict overloads and prevent sudden , unexpected failure modes.This multi-disciplinary project seeks efficient use of unlicensed spectrum by combining an engineering and technology perspective with insights from the literatures on regulation , property rights , and economic coordination .
The team includes researchers with expertise in property rights , networking fairness , and wireless communications and network engineering .
This team is developing a general framework for understanding cooperation in unlicensed band wireless networks by studying the following issues Property rights as applied to spectrum management Protocols for collaboration between technology neutral wireless devices Pricing mechanisms for efficient and fair sharing of congested unlicensed spectrum Radio-level interference avoidance techniquesThe above problems are being studied with a combination of formal and conceptual analysis , simulation and experimental methods , including a dynamic spectrum management testbed which implements potential collaboration protocols and cooperation models .
The thrust is to preserve the creative chaos of the unlicensed bands while creating a degree of long term stability and predictability that is appropriate to the size of the investments being made and the strategic importance of these uses to the nation .
Results from the project are of value to both policy makers and emerging unlicensed band wireless Internet providers as well as wireless technologists .
The condensed matter physics project will develop a new laser light scattering technique to measure the elastic constants of materials up to mega-bar pressures achievable in a diamond anvil cell .
The research is based on the detection of standing wave resonances that develop because of surface corrugation effects .
The technique is particularly useful for studies of opaque materials and will be applied to key materials important in geophysics .
Experiments are proposed that should provide insights into the physics of poorly understood deformation mechanisms and elastic properties associated with buried interfaces and embedded laminar structures .
The frequency profile and spatial confinement of acoustic waves confined in these systems will yield new opportunities for acoustic wave device applications .
In addition , the unusual mechanical properties of a new , photo-modified , state of glass that is stabilized at optimum connectivity in binary chalcogenide glasses will be investigated .
Also of interest is the important interplay between mechanical stability and pronounced glass forming tendencies related to local connectivity between atoms .
The project will train graduate and undergraduate students in challenging issues in contemporary solid state physics .
They will gain valuable experience with modern laser spectroscopy techniques .
This education will prepare them for productive careers in academia or industry.The project will support a laser spectroscopy study of the acoustic and mechanical properties of solids .
The research involves the behavior of materials under extreme compression - approaching pressures at the Earth 's interior .
It will develop a new method to probe high-pressure behavior of materials and will yield critical parameters for theories of material structural properties .
The study dealing with high frequency acoustic waves confined to buried layers should provide important information into the physics of localized excitations .
The frequency profile and spatial confinement of the waves will yield new technological opportunities that will not suffer from bandwidth limitations of conventional surface wave devices .
The proposed study of glasses addresses key aspects of their elastic and optical properties through creation of a new , photo-modified , state .
Of interest is how the properties of this state relate to the formation of glasses and how glass properties depend on the specific local connectivity of atoms .
Together with the freedom and flexibility associated with the non-crystalline nature of glasses , the unusual light-induced effects may yield results of technological value in these useful materials .
This research will be conducted with the aid of graduate and undergraduate students .
They will gain valuable experience through their involvement in contemporary forefront research in solid state physics and laser spectroscopy techniques .
These experiences will be of great value in their further studies , or employment in industry , academia or government laboratories .
0205121GriffinThis award supports Dr. Kevin Griffin of Columbia University for a three-year collaborative research project with Dr. David Whitehead of Landcare Research Institute and Dr. Matthew Turnbull of the University of Canterbury , both in New Zealand .
The research will assess the contribution of woody tissue respiration to the carbon balance in a forest ecosystem .
Objectives include 1 ) making continuous real time measurements of respiration from stems , branches and roots for periods of days to weeks under field conditions , 2 ) determining the processes influencing wood respiration by monitoring responses to natural environmental variability in different forested ecosystems , and 3 ) quantitatively describing these responses for use in a model to estimate ecosystem carbon balance .
Understanding the processes that regulate the carbon balance of forest ecosystems is a critical issue in predicting how forests will impact the atmospheric carbon dioxide balance in the future .
This collaboration brings together the efforts of international laboratories that have complementary expertise and research facilities .
The project will also enhance the international research competence of the American graduate student who will participate in the research in New Zealand .
In a variety of disciplines large , numerical simulations have become a fundamental scientific tool .
A key problem is how to inform or update such simulations in real time with large numbers of noisy observations , especially when many of the predicted variables are unobserved or the observed quantities bear a complex relation to the predicted variables .
In principle , Bayesian methods provide a solution to this state-estimation problem , but evolving and updating the required probability distributions are problematic in practice , as the most straightforward approaches require computations of overwhelming size.These collaborative investigators will address these issues through the use of novel ensemble-based or Monte Carlo approaches and within the context of numerical weather prediction ( NWP ) .
Weather prediction is a challenging test of any approach to state-estimation , as operational models for the continental United States will soon have of the order of 108 degrees of freedom and ingest an observational data stream of more than a terabyte per day .
The Principal Investigators ' application of ensemble state-estimation techniques to NWP is motivated by recent success in test problems with simulated observations , ranging from the prediction of isolated thunderstorms in a cloud model to global atmospheric flow in a general circulation model , and by potential advantages over existing operational data assimilation schemes .
In particular , ensemble-based techniques directly estimate the uncertainty of the prior prediction and thereby avoid the assumption of stationary , isotropic forecast uncertainty made in most existing schemes .
The benefits of this direct estimation will also likely increase as next-generation of NWP models reach resolutions of about 1 km and the use of remotely-sensed observations , such as from the operational network of Doppler radars , increases at those scales .
Thus , this research will lay the foundation for a significant step forward in weather forecasting , especially at the scales where most severe and disruptive weather occurs.The proposed work will be carried out within the context of the Weather Research and Forecasting ( WRF ) model , which is a next-generation NWP model designed for use at the horizontal resolutions of 1-10 km .
The WRF model will be employed in operational weather forecasting and also will be supported for use by the research community .
Use of WRF multiplies the educational benefits of this project beyond the direct involvement of students and postdoctoral researchers and provides a clear path to the implementation of results to improve routine weather forecasts .
The team assembled within this group Information and Technology Research project includes leaders in ensemble assimilation techniques as well as members with expertise in numerical modeling , ensemble forecasting , and the interpretation of Doppler radar observations .
The project will be coordinated through joint supervision of graduate students and postdoctoral fellows , joint publications and annual workshops .
In addition , common software will be used in all the research , thus facilitating the transfer of methodologies and expertise within the group.Successful completion of this research potentially will provide significantly improved capabilities in weather numerical models .
These improvements will allow advances to be made in the forecasting of a variety of weather phenomena .
0205625Christopher DiGianoSRI International , Menlo Park , CATraining and Resources for Assembling Interactive Learning SystemsThis project leverages research and development outcomes from prior NSF funding that focused on interactive mathematics education .
The current project addresses three areas 1 ) Research involving undergraduate education focused on investigating the training needed to produce practitioners capable of collaborative design of educational software , 2 ) Research into the processes used by collaborative software design teams , and 3 ) Research into K-12 educational impact because of the use of software produced by collaborative design teams .
The project involves pre-college teachers and undergraduate and professional software developers in teams producing interactive software for K-12 .
In addition to primary goals of studying multidisciplinary collaborative teams and the impacts of the systems they develop on pre-college students , the project also looks at software re-use and collaborative tools needed for innovative applications of IT in education .
Outcomes of this project will be insights into and understanding of the kinds of course activities that are needed to enable effective teamwork between students with different backgrounds ; course activities that will enable teams to discuss , share , and enact educational values in their software production process ; the packaging of curricula into modules that are adaptable by a variety of institutions ; the promotion of curricula that encourages enrollment by a broad spectrum of students in educational software development ; and , the preparation of new teachers and developers for future work involving collaborative design .
In addition , this project involves research into optimal design tools ( the kinds of tools and resources such as design scenarios , national standards , bug lists , feature lists , and mailing lists that help teams achieve shared understanding ) , collaboration mechanisms and the design of tools and spaces to encourage a culture of reuse where team members borrow pedagogical ideas and technical modules from exemplary artifacts and in turn contribute useful products of their own , and a social network of human experts and coaches needed to produce educational software ( i.e. , best practices that can be identified for the ways experienced classroom teachers and software developers coach and support teams in developing good designs and encourage balanced participation by technical and non-technical team members ) .
The overarching need that is addressed by the project is the shortage of standards-based , high-quality educational software for K-12 classrooms .
The project aims to validate the premise that appropriate training and resources can enable a team to transform today 's designs into improved designs that elicit and support higher-order mathematical thinking among the target K-12 students .
Testing this hypothesis requires research in classroom impact including exploring whether university student co-design teams can adapt and refine existing mathlet resources to produce new mathlets that engage higher-order mathematical thinking , identifying , refining , and disseminating to classrooms around the country the best mathlets from all participating institutions , expanding the adoption and utility of deployed mathlets be increased by enabling in-service teachers to configure the tools for their particular classroom needs .
This project involves collaboration between several academic institutions , research organizations , and businesses .
The San Diego Society of Natural History ( SDSNH ) will design , fabricate and install a 9,000 square foot permanent exhibition exploring the fundamental scientific concepts of paleontology , geology , biology and ecology as they pertain to prehistoric southern California and the peninsula of Baja California .
Playing the role of paleontologist , visitors will be invited to ponder a mystery , explore the setting , examine the evidence , and use scientific tools to discover answers .
Carefully crafted settings will support exploration that engages learners of all ages at levels for both novice and experienced learners .
Visitors will discover how natural patterns reveal natural processes , and examine the relationship between past , present and future .
Focused activities will enable visitors to exercise their skills of observation and critical thinking , with exhibits that promote learning in a family context .
The exhibits and activities focus on the Museum 's collections and research , and are grounded in comprehensive visitor research supporting exhibit development .
The exhibition and related science education materials will demonstrate how these fundamental concepts can be investigated in a regional setting .
Visitors will extend their learning experience beyond the museum through a content-rich interactive website , a popular book on regional geology and paleontology , and related public programs and fossil displays at regional nature centers near the actual discovery sites .
Exhibition planning , program evaluation and visitor research will be widely disseminated as contributions to the literature on best practices for interpretation of prehistoric life and landscapes Long-term effects of population reductions on genetic diversity are well understood , but few studies have examined short-term changes in genetic diversity in populations immediately after they have been founded .
The goal of this project is to compare changes in genetic diversity in three species of the grazing zooplankter Daphnia that recolonized a lake from a small number of founding individuals with a fourth population that was founded by a large number of individuals .
Long-lived dormant Daphnia eggs in sediments record annual changes in populations that can be reconstructed from sediment cores .
Genetic diversity of each of the four populations at several time points following recolonization will be measured to assess changes as the populations recovered in size.Daphnia species are a key component of aquatic ecosystems , serving as a control on algae and a food source for fish .
The ability of a population to respond to environmental changes depends on the level of genetic diversity present .
This study will thus provide important insights into how Daphnia respond to environmental change and influence community and ecosystem processes .
It will also provide empirical tests of theoretical models and contribute to our knowledge about how genetic diversity is maintained in natural populations , which in turn will foster more appropriate management or conservation plans .
Conventional computer architecture has been based on and dominated by thecapacity poor systems we were forced to build 20 and 50 years ago .
Forover three decades , the Instruction Set Architecture ( ISA ) has formed thebasic architectural abstraction for scalability .
As wonderful as the ISAabstraction has been , its range of utility is coming to an end .
Oursystems have grown orders of magnitude in size and speed , and many of thesimplifying assumptions which underly the ISA are limiting forwardscalability rather than enabling them .
This effort explores areformulation of our basic assumptions and machine abstractions toaccommodate the large capacity computing systems we can now build .
Whereasthe sequence of primitive instructions was the core fixed point in ISAmodel , this effort proposes stream-connected graphs as the model fixedpoint for these Decentralized Streaming Architectures ( DSA ) .
This waycommunication is abstracted directly in the architecture facilitatingparallelism and optimization for physical locality .
DSA will give us asingle , unifying system model for future computing systems which scalesfrom modest , single-chip , single-processor systems , to multiprocessor ICs , to a wide range of heterogeneous System-on-a-Chip designs , to large-scale , heterogeneous , multi-component systems that evolve over decade longlifecycles .
AST 0205974MeiselDr .
David Meisel , at State University of New York at Geneseo , in collaboration with Dr. John Mathews , at Penn State University , will conduct a 3-year observational and analysis/modeling study of small particles in the Solar System based on radar micrometeor observations performed at the Arecibo Observatory .
Knowledge of the distribution , sources , and gravitational , electrodynamical evolution of interplanetary dust particles ( IDPs ) in the ~0.2-100 micron size range is critical to the planetary sciences and-as extrasolar and interstellar particles are also present-to local galactic science .
The Arecibo Observatory ( AO ) UHF radar has proven to be uniquely suited for ground-based micrometeor observations that yield velocity , deceleration , and radiant information-and thus orbits-of large numbers of interplanetary and hyperbolic dust particles .
Observational results now extend from 1997 through the present with a steadily evolving technique that now yields meteoroid Doppler speeds with instantaneous accuracies of as small as 10 m/sec ( with meteoroid speeds ranging over 10-90 km/sec thus far ) .
This combined with a sorting mechanism based on classical , in-atmosphere meteoroid dynamics , clearly distinguishes down-the-beam particles from those meteoroids with a significant across-the-beam velocity component .
The new effort extends these studies to details of IDP distribution/evolution in the solar system and considers the role of the interstellar particle flux to the solar system as well as local galactic processes/features illuminated by this flux.The new observational/analysis/modeling study funded with this award will continue providing routine sampling of IDPs including the expected earth-crossing asteroidal-orbit particles , interstellar particles ( ISPs ) , Jovian perturbed and/or derived particles , and low-mass b particles ejected by radiation pressure from the inner solar system .
As the database of ISPs grows , these researchers will continue theoretical/modeling studies of the flux and origins of the largest of the interstellar particles .
Thus far they can account for all AO ISPs as being products of the same supernova thatproduced the Geminga pulsar .
This effort has involved and will continue to involve undergraduates from SUNY-Geneseo , Penn State , and other institutions and graduate students from Penn State as well as the staff of Arecibo Observatory and other organizations .
Results from these efforts appear in several courses including electromagnetics , astrophysics , and plasmas at both Geneseo and Penn State .
*** AST-0205427PI SimonThis is a program for measuring the masses of pre-main-sequence stars using millimeter wavelength interferometry .
Accurate measurements of stellar masses are crucial data , and this work will provide answers to some fundamental astrophysical questions .
In particular , it will provide observational constraints on two areas of astrophysical theory that are currently relatively poorly constrained pre-main-sequence evolutionary tracks , and theories of binary star formation .
The PI will also continue his program of the detection of faint secondary companions in single-lined spectroscopic binaries , both to measure the mass ratio distribution of binaries and to provide additional data to use for measuring masses when combined with resolved observations of binary star orbits .
As computer systems become increasingly ubiquitous , computer systems research and design has movedfrom being a highly performance-centric process to being one that juggles many design goals and metrics.Mobile and embedded computing systems must , in addition to providing sufficient performance , be rugged , reliable , power-efficient , and lightweight .
Because of the extreme and multidimensional design constraints they face , they must also be attentive to the specific needs of application domains , so they can be designed to satisfy these needs while still meeting power budgets and weight limits.The Princeton ZebraNet Project is an inter-disciplinary effort with thrusts in both Biology and ComputerSystems .
On the computer systems side , ZebraNet is studying power-aware , position-awarecomputing/communication systems .
Namely , the ZebraNet project works to develop , evaluate , implement , and test systems that integrate computing , wireless communication , and non-volatile storage along withglobal positioning systems ( GPS ) and other sensors .
On the biology side , the technology enables novelstudies of animal migrations and inter-species interactions .
From a computing standpoint , key researchbreakthroughs are required in protocol and system design in order to make the system power-efficient andreliable .
From a biology standpoint , the system enables fundamentally new types of biologicalobservations that allow us to ( i ) understand long-range migrations in large mammals , ( ii ) observe inter-species interactions between carnivores ( predators ) and ungulates ( prey ) , and ( iii ) track the behavior of extremely endangered species.As a computer systems research problem , ZebraNet is compelling because the needs of the biologicalresearchers are stringent enough to require real breakthroughs in wireless protocols and in low-powercomputer systems design and computer systems power management .
These breakthroughs can beleveraged into other ( non-wildlife-oriented ) fields of research ; essentially ZebraNet is a power-awarewireless ad hoc sensor network , but with more serious bandwidth and computational needs than most priorsensor networks research problems .
As a biology research problem , ZebraNet allows researchers to poseand to answer important long-standing questions about long-range migration , inter-species interactions , and nocturnal behavior.Major research activities span a broad range , including Modeling long-range animal migrations Observing inter-species predator-prey interactions Analyzing the impact of human development on animal behavior Developing power-aware systems for position-aware computing Incorporating error resilience and domain-specific performance optimizations into lightweight wireless protocols Managing logged sensor data to minimize the number of required uploads from tracking nodesZebraNet is engaging in a mix of theoretical research , prototyping , and field experimentation .
The projectis not solely about systems-building , but rather mixes theory with practical hands-on evaluations of theZebraNet designs .
Research is conducted both at Princeton University and at the Mpala Research Centre.Mpala is a biology field station in central Kenya that Princeton University administers along with theKenya Wildlife Service , the National Museums of Kenya , the Mpala Wildlife Foundation , and theSmithsonian Institution.Overall , ZebraNet represents a truly interdisciplinary effort bringing together research strengths fromdisparate fields over a challenging problem .
The potential contribution of the project includes significantadvances in computing technology as well as in our understanding of wildlife migrations .
The three mainresearchers bring strengths in wildlife biology , power-aware computer systems , and wireless technology.The interplay between these disciplines fosters creative to the research problems in both arenas .
COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH Evolutionary Success in Marine Invertebrates Testing the Relationships between Eurytopy , Longevity , and Geographic Range in Carboniferous CrinoidsThis study will focus on the role of environmental and biogeographic factors in the evolutionary success of crinoids ( echinoderms ) , one the most diverse and abundant groups of marine invertebrates during the Paleozoic .
Lower Carboniferous ( 354 to 314 m.y .
ago ) rocks record the peak of crinoid generic diversity during their evolutionary history .
Evolutionary success is measured by taxonomic longevity in the fossil record .
Current understanding of reasons for evolutionary success is incomplete , but available evidence indicates a positive correlation with environmental breadth ( eurytopy ) and geographic range .
Data supporting this correlation are limited for Paleozoic marine invertebrates .
Thus , analysis of Early Carboniferous crinoids , where preliminary work supports such a correlation , will more rigorously test the correlation and broaden our understanding of the relationships between eurytopy , longevity , and geographic range in marine invertebrates .
The research will compare the average stratigraphic ( longevity ) , environmental ( eurytopy ) , and geographic ranges of genera within crinoid groups ( suborders ) between North America and Europe , the two regions with the best fossil record .
The study will include the Kinderhookian to early Meramecian epochs of the Mississippian Period ( Early Carboniferous ) of North America and the equivalent Tournaisian to middle Visean epochs of the Early Carboniferous of western Europe .
Stratigraphic and geographic ranges of genera will be determined by evaluating all known species for correct generic assignment .
Simultaneously , data on environmental distribution will be tabulated for genera on both continents to calculate a eurytopy index value for each genus , both intracontinental and intercontinental .
Results of this investigation will bear directly on evolutionary theory as it endeavors to explain the history of life on Earth .
The extensive data set derived from this study will help elucidate the roles of environment and geography in determining generic longevity and , ultimately , group longevity in defining evolutionary success .
The Research in Undergraduate Institutions ( RUI ) project will investigate interaction of the stratosphere and troposphere in context of the stratospheric sudden warming phenomenon .
Interest in the stratospheric circulation , including sudden warming , has recently been rekindled by observational analysis that suggests that a primary mode of tropospheric variability in polar latitudes - the Northern Hemisphere Annular Mode - is influenced by the downward migration of annular anomalies from the stratosphere .
Variations in stratospheric polar vortex have been linked to seasonal anomalies in the tropospheric zonal-mean zonal winds and circulation patterns such as the Arctic Oscillation/North Atlantic Oscillation .
These patterns have profound impact on European and North American climate and weather .
Dr. Limpasuvan will conduct a dynamically oriented objective analysis of the mechanisms coupling the troposphere and stratosphere , including wave propagation .
Diagnosis of heat and momentum fluxes associated with sudden warming will also be undertaken .
The project will advance the understanding of mechanisms responsible for stratosphere 's influence on surface weather and climate .
The project will involve undergraduate students at Coastal Carolina University in an effort to integrate research into the school 's science education , and strengthen the institution 's new Applied Physics program .
It will provide valuable and unique research experience to undergraduates in South Carolina and the greater southeastern region .
This Small Business Innovation Research ( SBIR ) Phase I project 's objective is to overcome the drawbacks of existing imaging sensor designs , and to demonstrate a novel video camera design concept .
Named the Super-Eye , this camera is able to provide simultaneously both large depth of field the dynamic scene and selective high-resolution video images for the object of interest .
The unique advantages of the proposed Super-Eye concept include ( a ) achieving simultaneous high image resolution and large depth of field ; ( b ) Intelligent guidance of the high-resolution image channel ; and ( c ) 3D Modeling Capability.The requirements for high image resolution , large depth of field , and wide field of view are applicable to both the commercial and military markets .
The security surveillance market has experience near double-digit growth and is expected to maintain this growth in light of the events of 9/11 .
Security cameras are roughly 30 percent of the $ 100 billion global security industry .
In this collaborative research project , funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division , O'Brien will conduct research on the electronic spectroscopy of metal containing diatomic radicals CuO , NiH , NiCl , and NiF .
The goal of the work is to provide new or improved molecular constants for a series of electronic states and to construct the energy level scheme and potential curves of these species .
These species are characterized by their open shell structure , which give rise to a host of interactions between nuclear , electronic , vibrational , and rotational degrees of freedom .
Besides being of intrinsic interest , the results of this research will also have bearing on other fields such as astrophysics .
Experimental techniques are based on intracavity laser absorption spectroscopy , the equipment for which is located at the University of Missouri at Saint Louis .
This research will be conducted with undergraduate and MS level graduate students who will receive knowledge and training in the techniques of contemporary experimental and theoretical spectroscopy.This project consists of a collaboration between researchers at a primarily undergraduate institution and a major research university .
The research program is designed to provide new information about the energies of a set of metal containing diatomic molecules , the results of which will be useful to other fields such as astrophysics .
The project provides training in research to undergraduate and intermediate level graduate students in advanced contemporary techniques of laser spectroscopy .
The project also contains an outreach program that will allow gifted high school students to participate in the research .
The long term goal of the proposed research is to define plant small heat shock protein ( sHsp ) function at both physiological and mechanistic levels .
sHsps are a ubiquitous group of stress proteins that are believed to act as molecular chaperones to prevent irreversible denaturation/aggregation of other proteins .
sHsp chaperone function is potentially critical to plant survival of many different kinds of stress and to specific stages of plant growth and development .
Plants are characterized by an unusual complexity of proteins belonging to the sHsp family ; plants express both multiple cytosolic sHsps and specific sHsp isoforms targeted to intracellular organelles .
The evolutionary expansion of the sHsp family in plants indicates that sHsps have provided a selective advantage over time in many contexts .
The complete definition of the sHsp family from Arabidopsis , along with the biochemical framework from our studies of sHsp structure and chaperone action in vitro , provide a new starting point for investigations of sHsp function .
Using a combination of molecular genetic and biochemical approaches in Arabidopsis thaliana we will define the physiological role of specific sHsps in stress tolerance , growth and development , and identify specific sHsp substrates .
The proposed research has three specific aims .
Aim 1 To determine the growth and stress tolerance phenotypes of sHsp loss- and gain-of-function plants .
RNA interference transgenics and/or T-DNA insertional mutants for genes representing the class I & II cytosolic sHsps , as well as plants constitutively expressing class I and/or II sHsps , will be characterized for growth and stress tolerance .
Aim 2 To identify potential sHsp substrates .
We will test the hypothesis that sHsps bind a wide range of protein substrates and that each sHsp class interacts with unique substrates .
Aim 3 To define other biochemical phenotypes of sHsp loss-of-function mutants .
With these experiments it will finally be possible to test long-standing hypotheses about the importance of sHsps to plant stress tolerance and development and to uncover new functions for these unique chaperones .
Over the past 6 years the principal investigators have developed a methodology for assessing the risk associated with maritimetransportation .
The methodology utilizes dynamic simulation of themaritime transportation system , expert judgment elicitation models andprobabilistic risk assessment ( PRA ) techniques .
The approach has provenuseful in three major maritime ports in the United States i.e .
Port ofNew Orleans ( Mississippi River in Louisiana ) , Port Valdez ( PrinceWilliam Sound in Alaska ) and Port Seattle ( Puget Sound in WashingtonState ) .
Two of these studies focused on passenger safety , while theother focused on oil transportation risk .
The National Research Council in1998 assessed the methodology and concluded that representation of uncertainty in the maritime risk assessment method is lacking .
The Prince William Sound Risk Assessment is an important step forward in using probabilistic risk assessment methods to assess the safety of transporting oil in large tankersin PWS .
Because the data were very limited , the analysis results and the resultingconclusions are not robust and are necessarily uncertain [ National ResearchCouncil , 1998 ] .This NSF project will allow the maritime risk assessment method to liveup to its promise by developing a coherent theoretical framework toaddress uncertainty .
The truth is that we are uncertain .
Therefore , speaking the truth implies that we express our analysis results in termsof probability curves rather than fixed points estimates .
[ See , e.g. , Kaplan , 1997 ] .
The intellectual merit of the research stems from thedevelopment of an overarching Bayesian framework for addressinguncertainty when simulation of systems states is combined with availabledata and expert judgment to assess risk and risk interventioneffectiveness .
The broader impact of the proposed work is primarilydrawn from its applicability to areas other than maritime accident risksuch as e.g .
maritime security risk ( intentional events as opposed toaccidents ) .
The framework and methodologies to be developed will beapplicable to other transportation modes , such as aviation or roadsafety .
Aside from aviation security and accident risk , the techniquewill be directly transferable to the ever-increasing problem of runwayincursions as a result of increased traffic congestion at our nationalairports .
This Small Business Innovation Research ( SBIR ) Phase I project will develop a diagnostic instrument to detect molecular species , such as nitric oxide , in exhaled breath as a biomarker of airway inflammation to assess the effectiveness and compliance of asthma therapies .
This project will result in the fabrication of a biosensor suitable for clinical use .
Pre-clinical studies will be performed during the Phase I research to ensure that a proper protocol has been established .
The follow on Phase II project will incorporate clinical trials in preparation for FDA approval .
The commercial applications of this project will be in the area of biomedical diagnostic devices and instrumentation .
It is hoped that the instrument developed in the course of this project will acquire a good share of the $ 1 billion a year asthma diagnosis and treatment monitoring market .
Droughts are widely cited in both contemporary and historical accounts of African growth .
The now massive empirical literature on economic growth has grappled with the puzzle of low and volatile African growth , but has had very little to say about the impact of climate shocks .
This study develops empirical bounds on the impact of rainfall fluctuations on African growth and on the main channels of this impact .
The project brings a widely useful rainfall dataset to the attention of researchers focusing on economic growth in developing countries , on African development in particular , and on macroeconomic performance in individual African countries .
The project uses an historical dataset on national African precipitation patterns constructed for the purposes of the project by the principal investigators .
The underlying data are historical monthly weather-station observations that have been geographically gridded by climatologists for use in large-scale climatology models .
The data are rich enough to allow the construction of climate norms predating the period of analysis , which coincides with the availability of economic growth data beginning in the 1960s .
The investigators use estimated rainfall norms to calculate annual country-level rainfall shocks , which they then use in country-by-country time-series regressions that relate economic growth , investment , and agricultural output to these shocks .
Alternative transformations of the rainfall variable allow a sequence of readily-interpreted specifications to be implemented , including nonlinear specifications that allow for threshold effects , wet and dry outliers , and cumulative effects .
While there is a general consensus among scientists that the projected rise in the concentration of atmospheric CO2 will have a profound impact on productivity and composition of terrestrial ecosystems , our capacity to reliably predict the exact nature of these changes remain tenuous .
The unknown effects of other environmental factors such as nitrogen ( N ) and water are major sources of this uncertainty .
N is an essential mineral nutrient whose availability and utilization regulates plant responses to high CO2 .
This high leverage by N is fortuitous when one considers the intricate connection between carbon ( C ) and N in plant biology .
It is well recognized that in the short term , plants exposed to high CO2 will enhance their C uptake .
Theoretically , however , only those species that can maintain a balance between N and C demand will sustain a long-term positive effect .
The few available data indicate that plant species vary widely in their N uptake responses to high CO2 .
However , observations from a few empirical studies can not be extrapolated to cover a wide range of species around the globe and we currently lack a mechanistic understanding to develop such a roadmap .
Here we propose to elucidate the major mechanism ( s ) that control plant N uptake when CO2 concentration is elevated using species from contrasting ecosystems .
We propose to develop physiological and biochemical markers that could be used to gauge the extent to which a target species can maintain its N and C balance .
The physiological and biochemical markers targeted here are known to control plant N uptake under natural conditions and therefore are likely to control N uptake responses under high CO2 as well .
The findings are equally important for basic research and management/policy issues that must deal with increasing pressure to cope with the future climate .
The proposed research will be conducted at six nationally funded Free Air Carbon dioxide Enrichment ( FACE ) experiments , two CO2 natural springs in Italy and New Zealand , and a number of open-top chambers at the University of Illinois at Chicago .
The results generated here will be critical for the development of predictive models designed to forecast the fate of terrestrial ecosystems in a future climate .
The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center ( MRSEC ) at Stanford University supports an interdisciplinary program in the area of polymeric materials .
The Center is entitled Center on Polymer Interfaces and Macromolecular Assemblies .
The MRSEC is a partnership between Stanford University , UC Davis , UC Berkeley and the IBM Almaden Research Laboratory.The research is organized into three interdisciplinary research groups ( IRGs ) .
Synthesis and Application of Nanostructured Materials ( IRG 1 ) has as its mission to develop new methods to prepare functional macromolecules followed by self- and directed assembly of these molecules into nanoscopic structures .
Potential applications are in nanotemplating , photovoltaic devices and novel catalytic systems .
The techniques and materials developed in IRG1 have direct applications for single molecule studies in IRG 2 and polymer bilayer assemblies in IRG 3 .
Structure and Dynamics of Confined Systems ( IRG 2 ) is concerned with the effect of confinement due to interfaces , entanglements , branching etc , on the structure and dynamics of molecules and macromolecular assemblies .
IRG 3 on Functional Biomolecular Membranes investigates the fabrication of the interfaces between lipid membrane-countering surfaces and biological systems and the study of the dynamical properties of these interfaces .
The ultimate goal of the IRG is to develop interfaces between hard and soft ( functional ) surfaces.The Center support undergraduate summer research activities in academic and industrial settings as well as in science museum projects .
Plans are to increase the participation of physically disabled students .
The REU activities will be extended to UC Berkeley and to the Institute of Polymers in Dresden , Germany .
The K-12 programs for teachers and students includes partnerships with area schools in collaboration with the East Palo Alto Unified School District .
New activities are planned together with the San Francisco Exploratorium and its Teacher Institute .
The Center operates shared facilities at Stanford and UC Davis .
These are accessible by CPIMA members as well as non-members .
In addition , CPIMA members have access to a wide range of facilities at the IMB Almaden Research Center.The Center 's participants include 26 faculty , 8 postdoctoral associates , 7 graduate students , and support for undergraduates and K-12 teachers .
Professor Curtis W. Frank directs the MRSEC .
Since its inception in 1970 , the Conference on Econometrics and Mathematical Economics ( CEME ) has sponsored a number of annual meetings on a variety of topics in economic theory and econometric methodology .
There are currently six seminars , in Bayesian Inference , Time Series , Forecasting , Microeconometrics , Decentralization , and General Equilibrium , which meet annually .
The purpose of this ongoing conference series is to stimulate discussion and research on the frontiers of econometric and economic theory , and to investigate the application of mathematical , statistical , and computational techniques to empirical economic studies .
It is intended to both encourage research on new topics and speed the dissemination of the latest findings by leading scholars .
To this end , these meetings have been exceptionally successful , providing forums for the exchange of ideas in economic theory and methods that are not constrained by more formal frameworks of journal publications .
The channels of communication are informal and regular , allowing specialists in selected topic areas to meet regularly , at widely dispersed institutions and for longer periods than is generally possible at meetings of professional societies .
CEME has been especially fruitful , particularly for young scholars at the beginning of their professional careers .
Recently , a number of structural changes to the CEME organization were made to ensure continuing diversity in the participants and research topics .
These changes include regular appointments of new co-organizers and seminar leaders .
New appointments have been made in most positions since the last funding period .
ABSTRACTProposal Number CTS-0213280Principal Investigator Sevick-Muraca , Eva MAffiliation Texas Engineering Exp StaTitle GOALI - Characterization of Dense Colloidal Suspensions with FDPMIn this project , the PI proposes to ( i ) develop and test new inverse algorithms for assessing particle size and size distribution in monodisperse , binary , and polydisperse suspensions from experimental multi-wavelength FDPM data , ( ii ) assess changes in FDPM measured scattering properties arising from depletion force , electrostatic interactions , and colloids functionalized with ligand receptor systems of biological significance ; and ( iii ) evaluate those changes in the context of first principles models of partial structure factor .
The final objective of the GOALI project is to develop a low cost , simple diagnostics tool in characterize the interaction between colloidal particles in dense suspensions .
Extension of the system to on-line characterization of intermediate and final colloidal products is planned for chemical , pharmaceutical , and biotechnology industries .
0213905WayneThe domestic dog is without question the most diverse species with regard to size and conformation .
Further , many conformation traits are fixed in breeds and it is argued that these traits may often have a simple genetic basis .
Therefore , the dog is a good model for identification of genes that have a consequential effect on skeletal development .
A novel experimental design is presented that aims to uncover specific genes that influence conformation , coat color and behavior .
The design utilizes a case controlled approach in which breed that share similar traits are scanned with 540 framework markers .
Regions of the genome that have low variability in a subset of markers are likely to contain genes that have been the object of selection in breeds .
Statistical and molecular tools are defined that will allow fine-scale mapping and eventual identification of major genes influencing traits .
To demonstrate the viability of the approach , three small studies are proposed 1 ) a genomic scan of 20 breeds thought to be inbred to demonstrate they have sufficient variation for our experimental design ; 2 ) a genomic scan of three breeds sharing the achondroplasia phenotype ( short legged dogs ) to show that the gene for this trait can be identified ; and 3 ) determination of the extent of homozygosity signal in regions flanking a gene known to cause a coat color phenotype in one breed .
This project will test the feasibility of a new approach to discover genes that have consequential effects on size and conformation .
Further , the footprint that intense selection leaves in the genome will be determined .
This may enable new approaches for gene mapping and provide a better understanding of skeletal development and evolution .
The symposium ( scheduled for the SICB meeting in Toronto , January 4-8 , 2003 ) has a number of related goals .
It shall honor Peter W. Hochachka for his numerous , pioneering and decades-long contributions to the study of biochemical adaptation to the environment .
The symposium shall feature historical perspectives and the latest developments in areas encompassed by the field of biochemical adaptation to the environment .
It shall provide zoologists an overview of how , over the past 30 years , the field of adaptational biochemistry has grown from an infant , highly speculative field into one that continues to be fascinating and dynamic , but is now mature , sophisticated , and highly influential .
The symposium shall demonstrate that the August Krogh Principle ( choosing the species best suited to the scientific question of interest ) is alive and well and illustrate the broad range of techniques including nmr spectroscopy , molecular biology , and comparative phylogenetic approaches , used in studies of biochemical adaptation .
The symposium shall illustrate how tightly interwoven this discipline has become with various subdisciplines in ecology and evolutionary biology , i.e. , that it has become one with the rest of the biological sciences .
The symposium shall have 10 speakers who will each give 30 minute presentations .
Their lectures shall be written up for publication in American Zoologist .
The interaction of the solar wind with the Earth 's magnetosphere produces a shock front .
The upstream region , referred to as the foreshock , has been found to have very complicated spatial and temporal structures .
Similarly within the sheath region between the magnetopause and the bow shock there can be complex structures that are believed to cause various transient events in the magnetosphere .
The kinetic effects of the ions play an important role in the interactions of the solar wind with the bow shock and magnetohydrodynamic ( MHD ) simulations , which treat the plasma a single component fluid , are not adequate for understanding the physics of this region .
This project will utilize 2-D and 3-D simulations using a high-resolution hybrid code to study the interactions .
The primary topics to be investigated are ( 1 ) the structure of the curved bow shock , including quasi-parallel and quasi-perpendicular shocks , the spatial and temporal variations in the foreshock and shock-particle interactions , and ( 2 ) the interaction of interplanetary discontinuities with the bow shock , with particular emphasis on hot flow anomalies ( HFAs ) .
This project addresses a fundamental question of brain evolution how well conserved is the main brain circuit diagram across the vertebrates ?
Specifically , this project aims to resolve contradicting predictions arising from two recent lines of research into a structure called the basal ganglia , which is important in initiating and learning complex behaviors .
One set of work , primarily on traditionally studied bird species such as pigeons and chickens , has shown close similarities between birds and mammals .
Another line of work , using the specific brain structures of songbirds , which learn their vocalizations , has found some key differences in how the basal ganglia circuits are organized .
Work proposed here will determine how portions of the chicken basal ganglia are wired , and how individual nerve cells in those structures work .
Emphasis will be on how similar or different the structure and function of these brain regions are between birds and mammals .
Data gathered through this sort of comparative research has two major beneficial effects they shed light on how brains have evolved ; and they provide information on how different species have solved problems in similar or different ways .
This Small Business Innovation Research ( SBIR ) Phase I addresses the development of a remote-telemetry compatible sensor for measuring reductions in methyl tertiary butyl ether levels in soil at underground storage tank cleanup sites .
At present , there are over 160,000 sites with petroleum and methyl tertiary butyl ether contaminated soil , which poses a significant threat to the environment as well as human health and safety .
In addition , there are approximately 286,000 underground storage tanks that pose a significant risk to the environment because they are not in compliance with federally mandated leak detection requirements.This sensor would enable the development of a new and improved chemical detection system for identifying methyl tertiary butyl ether levels in soil and to accurately determine the risks of underground storage tanks in cleanup sites .
This proposal aims to elucidate factors involved in edge-to-edge interactions between beta- sheets and to learn how to control this important mode of protein interaction , which is involved in protein dimerization , protein-protein recognition , and protein aggregation .
The proposal builds upon an exciting discovery by the Principal Investigator under NSF award CHE-9813105 ( Molecular Templates for Creating Artificial Protein Structures ) of a molecular template that induces beta-sheet folding and interactions when incorporated into peptides .
This molecular template is constructed as a composite of two amino acids .
One of these , Orn , is natural although not routinely found in proteins ; the other , Hao , was invented by the Principal Investigator and his students under the prior NSF support .
The Orn-Hao composite is easily incorporated into peptides using standard peptide synthesis techniques .
Peptides containing the Orn-Hao composite dimerize in a fashion similar to that of certain beta-sheet proteins .
The current proposal will study the dimerization of peptides containing the Orn-Hao composite and learn how to control the dimerization process through a series of experiments .
The earlier experiments will focus upon optimizing the structure and folding of peptides containing the Orn-Hao composite , while the later experiments will focus upon learning how to use specific interactions to control the dimerization .
All of these studies will rely heavily upon organic synthesis , peptide synthesis , NMR titration , and NMR NOE methods .
The intellectual merit of this work is that interactions between beta-sheets are widespread and important , yet the molecular basis for these interactions is not well understood .
The proposed work explores creative and original concepts , by using small chemical model systems to address this fundamental and important biological problem .
One special merit of using these small chemical model systems , instead of larger proteins , is that these systems can be prepared easily and used to evaluate hypotheses very rapidly .
Another special merit of these model systems is that they will be able to be prepared in other laboratories , thus enabling other researchers to use them to test their own ideas about protein folding and interactions.With this Award , the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program ( OMC ) will support the research of Professor James Nowick of the University of California- Irvine .
Professor Nowick 's work is expected to generate valuable basic scientific knowledge with important biomedical implications .
In addition , this proposal will have broader impacts through the training of students and the development of human resources .
Undergraduate , graduate , and postdoctoral students working on this project will be trained to perform cutting-edge research in the laboratory and will also learn to effectively communicate their results to others by presenting their work in seminars , at meetings , and through publications .
Many of these well-trained students will contribute to the US scientific endeavor and the economy as researchers in the pharmaceutical industry .
0213023ScanlonLeaves are the fundamental organ of plant shoots , and develop via the morphogenetic activity of shoot apical meristems .
Previous studies suggest that the precisely regulated balance of hormone concentration and hormone transport are key components in leaf organogenesis .
Three mutations disrupting early events in maize leaf pattern formation will be exploited in biochemical and molecular genetic investigations probing the role of the plant hormone auxin during early stages in leaf development .
The mutations narrow sheath1 , narrow sheath2 ( ns1 , ns2 ) and ragged seedling2 ( rgd2 ) all disrupt development of maize lateral organs , leading to narrow leaf and shortened stem phenotypes .
Maize leaves contain at least two lateral compartments , the central and marginal domains .
NS function is essential for recruitment of the marginal compartment , but is not required for the development of the central leaf domain .
The ns mutantphenotype , which mimics IAA-overexpressing mutants , is controlled by the non-homologous , duplicate factor mutations ns1 and ns2 .
Narrow sheath 2 has been cloned , and encodes a NITRILASE that has been shown to function in the production of auxin .
Transcripts of ns2 accumulate in an alternating pattern subtending the marginal compartment of maize leaf primordia .
Mutations in the ragged seedling2 gene condition more extreme narrow leaf phenotypes , and may disturb development of both the central and the marginal domains .
Four specific aims are proposed.1 ) The NS2 RNA and protein accumulation patterns will be analyzed in all developing maize tissues by in situ hybridization and immunolocalization .
NS2-specific polyclonal antibodies will be prepared .
Of particular interest is the NS2 accumulation patterns in developing embryos and intissues unaffected by the ns mutations.2 ) The expression patterns of the auxin responsive Aux/IAA genes of maize will be analyzed by in situ hybridization in ns and nonmutant samples .
Non-mutant apices will be treated with xogenous auxin transport inhibitors , and ns apices will be treated with auxin .
These assays will test the hypothesis that the ns mutant phenotype is the result of defective auxin-mediated signalling in the ns margin domain.3 ) The ns1-R mutation is linked to a genomic polymorphism at the aldehyde oxidase ( ao ) locus , which encodes an enzyme involved in IAA biosynthesis , and ns mutants aberrantly express AO transcripts .
Reverse genetic mutagenesis of ao loci , transposon mutagenesis of new ns1 alleles , and cloning of ao genes from ns mutant plants will determine whether ns1 encodes an AO in maize.4 ) Genetic and molecular analyses will test the hypothesis that RGD2 functions during early stages of maize leaf development .
Double mutant analyses of rgd2 with ns and leafbladeless1 , and the expression profiles of genes involved in early leaf development ( ns2 , terminal ear1 ) will be analyzed by in situ hybridization .
Additional alleles of rgd2 will be obtained by transposon tagging , for use in attempts to clone the rgd2 gene .
Shaffer0213155One of the most important goals in environmental biology is understanding how changing , variable climates effect the distribution of plants and animals .
In the U.S. , it is known that the end of the last major glaciation about 20,000 years ago was a period of extreme climate change , with mile-thick ice sheets extending south of Chicago and New York City .
It is suspected that these ice sheets had other climatological effects , including a period of extreme dryness that extended over much of the Great Plains and Rocky Mountains .
Research is proposed that seeks to understand the effects of this drying period by sampling the DNA of multiple vertebrate species with different ecological tolerances , and analyzing them for characteristic patterns of variation that are associated with range contraction followed by range expansion .
Thus , the animals that currently live in the Great Plains will provide information , via their DNA , how climatological events affected them 20,000 years ago .
This work will be conducted on National Wildlife Refuges and Long Term Ecological Research sites , employing and training local high school and college students from across the country .
This research will allow us to better understand why some parts of our country have very high species diversity while others are low , as well as how future climate changes will affect patterns of animal diversity .
This MRSEC at Pennsylvania State University is entitled Center for Nanomolecular Structures and supports three interdisciplinary research groups ( IRGs ) .
Molecular Nanofabrication ( IRG 1 ) combines self-assembly to advance nanolithography along several areas of emphasis .
The aim is to bridge the gap between the scale of single molecules and the much larger scale defined by conventional lithography .
Molecular Motors ( IRG 2 ) has as its goal to advance the understanding of fundamental issues of molecular motion and to develop techniques to exploit such motors in nanoassembly and nanoscale motion .
Both synthetic and hybrid biological motors are investigated .
IRG 3 entitled Collective Phenomena in Restricted Geometries explores the collective molecular , photonic and electronic effects in systems with reduced dimensionalitiy .
In addition to obtaining fundamental insights into the effects of reduced dimensionalities the work has potential applications for novel photonic and ferroelectric devices .
The Center will partner with the Penn State node of the National Nanofabrication Users Network to create a national resource in the extension of nanolithography in the areas of chemical self-assembly .
The Center 's has education activities ranging from the graduate to the undergraduate and to K-12 teachers and students .
The Center will also acquaint the general public with the Franklin Institute Science Museum in Philadelphia and the Exploratorium in San Francisco .
An interactive exhibit in the area of nanotechnology is planned with each museum .
The Center 's participants include 34 faculty , 6 postdoctoral associates , 12 graduate students , and support for undergraduates and K-12 teachers .
Professor Moses Chan directs the MRSEC .
With support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities ( CRIF ) Program , Prof. Andrey F. Vilesov of the University of Southern California will develop a state-of-the-art pulsed helium droplet spectrometer .
He will develop and optimize experimental methods for the generation of pulsed ( 50-100 microseconds ) helium droplet beams in order to achieve a factor of 100 - 10,000 higher intensity as compared to contemporary continuous-wave beams .
To fully exploit this advantage , he will mate the developed source with other modern pulsed experimental techniques such as infrared depletion spectroscopy , laser-induced fluorescence , laser photolysis , laser ablation , and time-of-flight ( TOF ) mass spectroscopy .
This will facilitate new experiments involving helium droplets , such as ( i ) studies of large bio-molecules ; ( ii ) assembly and interrogation of large metal and molecular clusters ; ( iii ) pump-probe experiments ; ( iv ) studies of photochemical reactions ; and ( v ) generation and use of very large droplets containing over 100 million atoms .
This development will help to establish He droplet spectroscopy as a versatile new tool , will make it cost-effective , and will make the technique immediately accessible to mainstream scientists .
The ultimate goal is the development of a pulsed helium droplet beam apparatus based on a closed-cycle refrigerator , equipped with pulsed infrared laser and a TOF mass spectrometer .
Graduate students will be involved in all phases , and will use the instrument as a training ground prior to integrating the pulsed nozzle in their own experiments .
This system will enable advances to be achieved that are not presently possible .
Other chemists interested in spectroscopy , analytics and low temperature chemical reactivity and dynamics can also benefit greatly from this user-friendly and cost-effective source .
Utilization to more applied areas such as interrogation of large biomolecules or development of new nano-materials is anticipated .
In this collaborative research project , funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division , O'Brien will conduct research on the electronic spectroscopy of metal containing diatomic radicals CuO , NiH , NiCl , and NiF .
The goal of the work is to provide new or improved molecular constants for a series of electronic states and to construct the energy level scheme and potential curves of these species .
These species are characterized by their open shell structure , which give rise to a host of interactions between nuclear , electronic , vibrational , and rotational degrees of freedom .
Besides being of intrinsic interest , the results of this research will also have bearing on other fields such as astrophysics .
Experimental techniques are based on intracavity laser absorption spectroscopy , the equipment for which is located at the University of Missouri at Saint Louis .
This research will be conducted with undergraduate and MS level graduate students who will receive knowledge and training in the techniques of contemporary experimental and theoretical spectroscopy.This project consists of a collaboration between researchers at a primarily undergraduate institution and a major research university .
The research program is designed to provide new information about the energies of a set of metal containing diatomic molecules , the results of which will be useful to other fields such as astrophysics .
The project provides training in research to undergraduate and intermediate level graduate students in advanced contemporary techniques of laser spectroscopy .
The project also contains an outreach program that will allow gifted high school students to participate in the research .
Both reproduction and whole-organism performance are influenced by the endocrine system , and all of these traits have heritable , genetic components .
Elucidating links among genetics , reproductive function , performance , and the endocrine and immune systems is essential to understanding how evolution has shaped reproductive strategies and physiology .
Systems with discrete polymorphisms provide good models for examining the relationships among these traits since variation both within and among morphs can be examined .
Male side-blotched lizards ( Uta stansburiana ) have three different color morphs ( orange , blue , or yellow throat ) , which arise from a gene of major effect .
Each of the types exhibits a different physiological and mating strategy ( defense of a large territory with multiple females , defense of an individual female , or sneaking into another male 's territory ) .
In particular , territorial orange-throated males have high stamina and high levels of plasma testosterone , relative to the other two types .
However , these males also have higher mortality rates than the other morphs .
Testosterone may decrease the capability of the immune system to cope with infectious agents .
In laboratory breeding studies , sprint speed , endurance , and standard metabolic rate of parents and progeny with known throat color genotypes will be measured .
In the field , variation in plasma hormones ( testosterone and corticosterone ) and their effects on sprint speed , endurance , and field metabolic rate will be studied .
DNA paternity analysis will provide field pedigrees to complement genetic studies in the laboratory .
These experiments will allow the investigators to evaluate the links among hormones , physiology , and reproduction .
Currently no data are available to address relations between genetics , physiology , performance , and reproduction ; this research accomplishes this major goal and establishes a database for future work .
Our work addresses the fundamental forces that shape the joint evolution of endocrine function , physiology and immune function .
The proposal is to establish a US-EU/DELOS working group on Digital Imagery for Significant Cultural and Historical Materials .
The working group will meet over the next year to discuss and evaluate fruitful joint activities and research paths for collaborative activities in this general topical area .
The EU component of the effort is funded and managed by the DELOS Forum , a major organizer of digital libraries research and planning activities in Europe .
DELOS receives support from the Information Societies Technologies ( IST ) 5th Framework Programme of the European Commission.This effort continues the planning and assessment activities begun by an earlier NSF-EU working groups ' process .
In their final report An International Research Agenda for Digital Libraries , delivered in Brussels in October 1998 , increased levels of collaboration and interaction was seen as critical to building multi-lingual , multi-national digital libraries .
The objective of the new working groups , of which this is one , is to define a research agenda on a specific topic and identify areas and activities for cooperation between EU and US researchers .
The efforts of this particular group take the next step in the planning process by assessing fruitful research activities and resource development related to digital imagery collections .
The severe economic crisis in Japan , associated with the collapse of the Japanese stock and real estate markets and the dramatic deterioration in the health of the Japanese banking sector , represents one of the major economic events of the late twentieth century .
It is even more striking because the second largest economy in the world remained stagnant for more than a decade , and even today shows no evidence of returning to the robust health that characterized most of its postwar history .
Why this economic weakness has persisted for so long is an important public policy issue and has been the source of substantial speculation and debate , with problems in the financial sector likely being a key contributor .
In particular , the misallocation of credit by troubled Japanese banks associated with pressures emanating from their historical ties to troubled firms may be a key contributor to the continuing stagnation of the Japanese economy .
Two forms of corporate affiliations are the focus of this study bank-centered financial ( horizontal ) keiretsus and the main bank system .
A concern is that these corporate affiliations have subverted corporate governance , insulating firms from the discipline that otherwise would come from outside directors , shareholders , and creditors , resulting in suboptimal business and financial decisions .
While previous studies have examined how these corporate affiliations affect investment decisions , stock returns , and corporate governance decisions , they have not directly examined how such affiliations impact the availability of credit .
This study will utilize a unique firm-level database that enables an examination of loans to firms to determine the extent to which such finance is affected by corporate affiliations , as well as the implications for macroeconomic activity and the effectiveness of monetary policy of any such misallocation of credit .
The study has three main objectives .
The first , and primary , objective is to investigate the impact of main bank and keiretsu affiliations on credit allocation during periods of firm and/or bank distress .
Preliminary evidence suggests that credit has been misallocated due to pressures from keiretsu and main bank ties , and that this misallocation has been allowed , and even encouraged , by government policies .
The second objective is to investigate the macroeconomic implications of this credit misallocation , in particular focusing on its contribution to the continuing stagnation of economic activity in Japan .
The third objective is to investigate the contribution of the troubled banking sector to the breakdown of the monetary policy transmission mechanism , and thus to the inability of monetary policy to restart the Japanese economy .
This study has important implications for appropriate policies to deal with banking crises , as well as the costs of inappropriate policies .
If scarce credit is allocated to uncompetitive and troubled firms , Japan will not experience the natural cleansing which results from the major restructuring that typically occurs in an economic downturn , with the consequence that longer-run economic growth may be reduced .
In that instance , it may not be that economic growth is stifled from too little overall credit , but rather from scarce credit being allocated to firms with the least productive investment opportunities .
When this misallocation of credit is combined with declining total domestic bank loans due to pressures on banks having difficulties achieving their capital requirements , the transmission of monetary policy can be short-circuited .
Furthermore , given that the Japanese economy remains the second largest in the world , resolving the crisis is important for the economic prospects for other countries , especially those in East Asia .
Professor Carlier and his students will first study the structures of lithiated nitriles in solution .
They will use a variety of NMR spectroscopic techniques in these studies .
Computational studies will be used to compliment and direct experimental work and have led the PI to propose the study of these lithiation reactions in noncoordinating hydrocarbon solvents .
Carbon metallated nitriles discovered in these studies will then be used in an enantioselective deprotonation/alkylation reaction sequence which will be applied to enantioselective syntheses of alpha , alpha-disubstituted-alpha-amino acids.With this award , the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr. Paul R. Carlier of the Department of Chemistry at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University .
Professor Carlier and his students will study the structures and reaction chemistry of a class of molecules known as lithiated nitriles .
The structures will be predicted using computational chemistry and modelling techniques then studied spectroscopically using nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy .
Nitriles which can be lithiated on the carbon next to the nitrile functional group will then be used in enantioselective carbon-carbon bond forming reactions called alkylation reactions .
These alkylation reactions produce molecules which are chiral ( have two nonsuperimposable mirror images ) and make only one of the two possible forms ( a single enantiomer ) .
Development of this family of reactions is one of the most important problems facing the pharmaceutical industry today .
Students trained during the course of this work will gain skills in computational chemistry , nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy , and organic synthesis .
These skills are needed by the pharmaceutical and speciality chemicals industries .
SES-0213319Dana L. HaynieOhio State UniversityResidential Mobility and Adolescent Risk BehaviorThis research seeks to explain why a family 's residential mobility tends to have a negative impact on their adolescent children .
Changing schools is correlated with a variety of risky adolescent behaviors and negative outcomes such as delinquency , sexual activity , suicide , and poor academic achievement .
This study attempts to identify the mechanisms that explain these outcomes .
Peer social networks may be especially important since low status , often deviant , peer groups may be more receptive to new , entering students .
The analysis will use new longitudinal data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health ( Add Health ) that include measures of both outcomes and peer networks .
The project holds promise for developing theories of social control and social networks , and for informing parents and school officials as they deal with the stresses experienced by adolescents when they move to new communities and schools .
This Small Business Innovation Research ( SBIR ) Phase I study is aimed toward development of an efficient procedure for predicting growth of ternary III-V semiconductor materials grown by Metal Organic Vapor Phase Epitaxy ( MOVPE ) .
These techniques are now used extensively in the semiconductor industry to model growth of materials on substrates by chemical vapor deposition .
The success of such modeling depends largely on the complexity of the gas phase and surface reaction mechanisms used to predict the growth process .
While multi-step finite-rate reaction mechanisms involving approximately ten to twenty species are adequate for modeling growth of binary alloys , accurate modeling of ternary alloy growth necessitates many more reactions and species .
This renders the calculations for such scenarios extremely expensive and prohibitive .
This technology can improve a wide variety of electronic and opto-electronic are devices .
Optimization and characterization of their growth is crucial to the success of the opto-electronic and semiconductor industry .
While commercial these codes have been used with great success for modeling growth of pure and binary semiconductor materials , their success has been limited ( if not non-existent ) for ternary materials due to the lack of knowledge of the chemistry and the extreme computational efforts required o perform such calculations .
With National Science Foundation support , Drs .
Shobhana Chelliah and Willem de Reuse will conduct three years of linguistic research on Western Apache , a Native American language spoken by approximately 13,000 people in central and eastern Arizona .
Tribal members , educators , and linguists have been concerned about the loss of Western Apache , a language that has played a major role in the culture and history of the American Southwest .
At present , less than 3 % of Apache children are acquiring Western Apache as a first language , and thus the language may no longer be spoken by the end of this century .
This project will result in the first comprehensive dictionary of the language .
This dictionary will provide reliable and consistent spellings , attestations of words no longer used , grammatical analyses , full conjugations for the verbs , and example sentences for each word.This project is significant for several reasons .
The Western Apache Dictionary will be used for the design and implementation of language revitalization and teaching programs .
It will be made available in paper and electronic format , allowing for the generation of supplementary children 's and learners ' dictionaries .
The dictionary will also be a reference for linguists interested in the structure of non-western languages or in comparing Apache with related languages such as Navajo .
Anthropologists and ethnohistorians may also use these materials .
Various fallacies in thinking interfere with judgment aboutmatters of tax .
In particular , people may oppose orinconsistently support optimizing reforms -- - or favor reformsthat are less than optimal -- - because of three clusters ofcognitive biases .
One , the status-quo effect , leads people toresist beneficial change they are apt to weigh perceived lossesmore than foregone gains .
Two , manipulation of the point ofcomparison affects how people perceive the advantages anddisadvantages of reform proposals .
Three , people underestimate orignore various unseen elements of fiscal policy , such asimputed income and the incentive effects or opportunity costs ofvarious tax and transfer programs.We shall explore these effects in a series of experiments , someconducted on the World Wide Web and others conducted with othersamples .
We shall examine these effects in a wide range ofrealistic tax reform proposals , e.g. , those concerned with taxeson married couples , hidden taxes , payroll taxes , consumptiontaxes , taxes on imputed income , pollution taxes , and taxes thatsubstitute for private expenditures ( such as those that pay forhealth care ) .
Finally , we shall attempt to debias the effectsof interest , and explore the transfer of training from one domainto another ( in part by using samples of people who have alreadybeen trained in the economic theory of taxes ) .
How plants perceive and transduce hormone signals is a fundamental question in biology that also has important practical applications .
The response to ethylene gas serves as a paradigm for understanding of plant hormone signal transduction .
Ethylene plays critical roles in development ( such as in the ripening of fruits ) and in responses to a variety of physical and biological stresses ( such as pathogen attack ) .
Understanding of these various roles of ethylene are being addressed using genetic , molecular and biochemical approaches in Arabidopsis .
In particular , the goal of this project is to characterize the functions of the EIN3/EIL family of plant specific DNA-binding proteins in ethylene-mediated transcriptional regulation .
EIN3 encodes a DNA-binding transcriptional activator protein and is a member of a small gene family of EIN3-LIKE ( EIL1 , EIL2 , EIL3 , EIL4 , EIL5 ) proteins .
Along with another transcription activator called ERF1 , the EIN3/EIL proteins participate in a little understood transcriptional regulatory cascade .
This project will investigate how the activities of the EIN3/EIL proteins are modulated by ethylene and also explore the roles of these proteins in mediating ethylene signaling to the various downstream responses .
In particular , the possibility of posttranslational modification ( s ) , changes in protein stability or alterations in the subcellular localization of EIN3/EIL proteins in response to ethylene will be examined .
In addition , biochemical and genetic approaches will be employed to identify EIN3/EIL interacting proteins .
Analysis of individual EIL1 , EIL2 , EIL3 , EIL4 , and EIL5 loss-of-function mutants , various multiple mutant combinations and ectopic expression of these genes will provide significant new insight into the possible functions of these genes in downstream responses to ethylene .
In addition , genome-wide studies of EIN3/EIL gene expression and in vivo target identification will be conducted using custom gene expression and whole genome tiling arrays , respectively .
Identification and characterization of the EIN3/EIL ethylene signaling pathway genes and analysis of their interactions with other signaling pathway components will provide new insights into tremendous diversity of biological affects of the simple hydrocarbon , ethylene .
Moreover , understanding of the functions of these proteins will allow the ability to modify the beneficial and/or detrimental effects of ethylene in any plant , in particular , crops with important economic or social value .
This project studies how , and to what extent , property relations in contemporary rural China have been and are being restructured through the examination of land litigation , an arena in which the ownership of agricultural property has been redefined , negotiated , and contested among interest groups including the socialist state , the village collective , and individual households .
This research combines an analysis of power mechanism with consideration of the cultural dimensions of property and law in China .
Fieldwork will be conducted in Huangnihe , a rural township in southwestern China .
The social histories of local land cases will be traced through participant observation and discourse analysis .
This project will be conducted at a time in China when rural households and collectives are enjoying the widest latitude in land management since the 1950s .
By exploring land ownership from the specific perspective of legal disputes , this project will add new dimensions to the current research on China 's rapidly changing property relations in the post-Mao era .
Moreover , this project will be the first anthropological study of local legal functioning the mainland China and it will be conducted at a time when nationwide concern with legal reform in most pronounced .
Unlike most of the recent work on China 's law , which overwhelmingly focuses on the urban area , this research will focus on the rural area where almost 80 % of China 's population lives .
This Small Business Innovation Research ( SBIR ) Phase I project objective is to research and develop the next generation of ultrasound real-time volumetric imagers , with enhanced spatial resolution and picture definition .
The innovation is based on LEEOAT Company 's patented micromachining technology and its expertise in parallel high-density electronic interconnections to innovate the Ultrasound-on-a-Chip ( UOC ) device .
In phase I of the SBIR program , LEEOAT Company will design the device and demonstrate the fabrication feasibility of the crucial components , thus demonstrating the proof-of-concept of the UOC imaging system .
Additionally , LEEOAT Company will theoretically simulate the UOC device and the support electronics for performance optimization and to predict the anticipated final performance of the imager .
Finally , the cost/effort will be estimated for the final development , fabrication and testing of the UOC imaging system prototype for medical applications.The major commercial application involves ultrasonic noninvasive medical imaging .
Industrial applications include non-destructive evaluations such as defect identification in integrated circuits .
Professor Rotello and co-workers will initially study the effects of redox switching on the molecular recognition properties of a number of small molecules ( imide-diaminopyridine dyads ) .
They will use EPR , NMR , and density functional computational methods to determine the factors that control the efficiency of redox modulated molecular recognition processes .
They will then apply redox modulated recognition process to the controlled formation of supramolecular polymers and polymer networks .
This polymer work will involve development of redox active cross linkers for use in electronically controlled cross linking processes and redox controlled polymerization , both at surfaces and in solution .
With this award , the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr. Vincent M. Rotello of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst .
Dr. Rotello and his students will work on the development of small molecules which can be electrically induced to change their recognition and polymerization properties .
The goal is to prepare materials which can be manipulated to change binding partners electronically or change oligomerization/polymerization state electronically .
The organic based molecular devices developed will have the potential to function as information storage/switching systems in computers or sensors .
Students trained during the course of this interdisciplinary work will gain skills needed by the pharmaceutical , polymer and speciality chemicals industries .
This project will address theoretical and computational methodology for massively large , approximate optimization problems in network design and routing , encompassing both static and online problems .
A central component of the work will be the implementation of the PI 's algorithms on architectures such as IBM 's forthcoming BG/L.The work will be directed at problem instances arising in networking and telecommunications , that are far larger than those currently studied by the mathematical programming community .
While metropolitan area networks , at an appropriate level of aggregation , involve a few hundred nodes , computer networks can be far larger .
Looking toward next-generation networking , especially wireless and adhoc networking , the need for optimization tools that can handle much larger networks becomes pressing.The PI 's previous work built upon methodologies on potential function methods for linear programming , developed during the last decade primarily by the theoretical computer science community .
His work further developed the methodology and produced an effective implementation .
This implementation is fast ( more efficient than competing special-purpose algorithms and much faster than commercial software ) , it is quite accurate for engineering purposes , and it is general it handles network design problems , static throughput routing problems , multicommodity flow problems , and in fact , a much more general class of linear programming problems , all with a common interface and no user-selected parameters .
It successfully handles problems involving networks with hundreds and up to a few thousand nodes .
The resulting linear programs , with tens of millions of variables and constraints , are at the limit of what can be considered approachable with state-of-the-art linear programming software.When considering larger networks , however , the dimensions of the optimization problems increase by several orders of magnitude , placing them well beyond the capabilities of current methods and implementations - these problems are large enough that the idea of optimization becomes rather daunting .
At the same time , the complexity , economics , and fast-changing nature of networking applications provides a stringent need for cost-effective , survivable designs and high throughput routing schemes .
This work will seek to build on new , concrete methodological ideas so as to develop algorithms with provably stronger convergence properties ; further , it will also develop high-performance implementations that can tackle massively large problems.A parallel effort will concern online routing problems .
Many online routing methods ( for example , dynamic routing schemes that seek to minimize congestion , or to achieve fair routings ) can be viewed as single iterations of potential function methods for corresponding static problems .
This project will use this idea , together with the PI 's work on static problems , with the aim of developing effective routing algorithms ; again , a significant part of this work will be computational.In both cases , this project will use previously established industrial research partnerships to validate methodologies and to obtain realistic data .
A central question in community ecology is how species diversity will typically respond tothe removal of a one or a few species .
Are species highly redundant so that the loss of one speciesis easily compensated for by other , functionally equivalent species ?
Or , do species tend to playunique functional roles so that the loss of one species can propagate out to cause a catastrophicloss of diversity .
These questions assume ever greater practical importance as the global wave ofextinctions accelerates .
And , although some progress has been made in simple model systems , westill have a vague understanding of more complex communities with dynamics that evolve overlarge temporal and spatial scales .
It is not clear whether anthropogenically induced extinction ofindividual species will generally cascade across these communities .
Most notably , we have littleability to predict how the mounting loss of the largest mammals to hunting is likely to affectdiversity in tropical forests , which are home to a large proportion of the world 's species.The primary focus of this study will be the collection of empirical data linking the rangingbehavior of terrestrial mammals to tree species diversity in a Congo forest .
The study site typifiestropical forests worldwide in that its mammals act both as seed dispersers for a species rich guildof spatially rare trees and seed predators of a species poor guild of spatially aggregated trees.Even though mammals of many body sizes disperse and predate the same tree species , they maynot be functionally redundant because mammalian body size is highly correlated with rangingscale .
Thus , large mammals are particularly mobile seed predators that are drawn to dense standsof the species poor guild from great distances .
Large mammals also tend to disperse seeds over agreat area , which provides a number of benefits to mutualists in the species rich tree guild , including escape from predators & pathogens .
Consequently , local extinction of large mammalsmay well tip the competitive balance between guilds , triggering a loss of diversity in the speciesrich tree guild that propagates out through a myriad of dependent plants and animals , includingsmaller mammalian seed dispersers.This project will include both animal and vegetation studies and use a combination of groundand remote sensing methods .
Aerial video and satellite imagery at several resolutions will be usedto develop detailed maps of the distribution of the two tree guilds over a large scale .
Line transectmethods will then be used to quantify how the spatial grain of mixing between the two tree guildsinfluences both fruit availability and the spatial distribution of mammals varying in body sizefrom mice to elephants .
Trapping studies on rodents , the first GPS telemetry study on severalduiker species , and the first telemetry study of any kind on red river hogs will quantify how bodysize influences the spatio-temporal pattern of fruit availability within an animal 's home range.And an attempt will be made to identify a set of individual tree species using high-resolutiondigital photography and aerial videography .
If this proves successful , it will allow the first large-scale scale study of tropical tree distribution and phenology .
The empirical data collected in thestudy will be used to parameterize coupled , spatially explicit models of animal ranging andvegetation dynamics with the goal of predicting how large mammal extirpation is likely to affecttree species diversity.In addition to addressing basic theoretical issues , data collected in this project will be ofdirect value to wildlife management , both guiding management at the study site and informingpark planning and sustainable hunting programs across the region .
Remote sensing methodologiesdeveloped in this project will also provide the tools for studying how the wave of loggingcurrently sweeping Central Africa is likely to affect tree species diversity .
And African personneltrained and employed in the study will bolster feeble research and management capacity in theregion .
Bacterial chromosomes and plasmids are usually circular .
Borrelia burgdorferi , the Lyme disease agent , has linear chromosomes and harbor linear as well as circular plasmids .
These linear replicons have closed hairpin ends ( one DNA strand turns around and continues but becomes the complementary strand to form a linear duplex without free ends ) .
In the temperate lambda-like phages N15 of E. coli and KO2 of Klebsiella oxytoca , upon lysogeny the prophage DNA 's are not integrated into the circular bacterial chromosome , but exist as linear plasmids with closed hairpin ends .
Occurrences of this type of DNA ends , though not common , have recently been recognized in different branches of the bacterial kingdom .
The goal of this research is to study the mechanism with which these closed hairpin ends are generated using both genetic and molecular biological approaches .
Both the phage encoded as well as the Borrelia bacterial encoded systems will be investigated .
An integrase/recombinase-like protein called protelomerase has been identified as the enzyme that acts in a sequence-specific manner via a cleavage-rejoining mechanism to generate the closed hairpin ends .
The specific interaction between the protein and the target site , as well as the pathway of hairpin end generation will be investigated in detail .
A saturation mutagenesis will be conducted to identify critical amino acids needed for function .
This project can also lead to the design of new linear cloning vehicles especially for cloning lethal genes .
The study of linear hairpin-ended replicons will provide new insight into chromosome maintenance .
Since all pathogenic Borrelias have linear chromosomes with hairpin ends , this research will also contribute to the understanding of the biology of Borrelia diseases .
This Doctoral Dissertation addresses the following question What factors explain the popularity of political parties that promise an Islamic solution to social ills ?
Since the 1970s , the importance of Islam in social and political life visibly increased not only in authoritarian Middle Eastern states but also in the secular state of Turkey and in immigrant Muslim communities in the Western World .
At a time when liberal-democracy has achieved victory over socialism , Islam stands as an alternative to liberal-democratic values .
The project relies on three different data sets .
First , it uses the information obtained from World Values Surveys conducted in eight predominantly Muslim countries .
These countries are Bangladesh , Egypt , Indonesia , Iran , Jordan , Morocco , Pakistan , and Turkey .
These surveys contain valuable information about the value-systems , political behavior , and attitudes towards public issues of the respondents .
The Principal Investigator will also conduct a comparative analysis of two districts of Istanbul to see how they differ in their popular bases for political Islam .
Although , these regions have very similar socioeconomic and demographic conditions , Islamist parties managed to establish a popular base in only one of the districts .
These natural settings provide an excellent opportunity to discern the factors that explain the popularity and the limits of political Islam .
Finally , it uses data generated from open-ended interviews from Islamist politicians in Turkey .
This third data set serves two goals .
On the one hand , it helps the Principal Investigator to identify what political Islam offers to the people .
On the other hand , it illuminates how the elites of the Islamist movements think about politics along with spotting their perceptions of liberal-democracy and West .
In summary , this project aims to contribute to the scholarly knowledge in the following realms the relationship between secularization and liberal-democracy ; the prospects of democracy in the Muslim world ; the implications of Islamic revival for liberalism ; and the reasons for the rise of Islam as a major political force .
The Materials Research Science and Engineering Center ( MRSEC ) at Princeton University supports a broad based interdisciplinary research program in the area of complex materials , including polymers and soft materials , electronic materials , and biomaterials .
The Center also supports a wide range of education activities , including science curriculum support for middle and high school teachers , a summer outreach program for high school students , and an African outreach program .
The Center supports well-maintained and accessible shared experimental facilities and interacts with industry and other sectors at local , regional , national and international levels .
The Center 's research is organized into three interdisciplinary research groups ( IRGs ) .
IRG 1 , Interplay of Magnetism and Transport in Correlated Electronic Materials , focuses on charge and spin transport in complex , correlated electronic materials .
IRG 2 on Guided Self-Assembly investigates new methods for fabricating large-scale assemblies of patterned structures with features on the nano and micrometer scale .
Potential applications are in the areas of nanomagnetics , manipulating biomolecules on a nanoscale , as well as photonics .
Adhesion , Deformation , and Transport at Contacts in Small Structures ( IRG 3 ) is an entirely new effort with focus on small scale contacts that are of importance in microelectronic , photonic , and micro-electromechanical devices .
Two large seed projects are devoted to patterned assemblies of functional cell-based biomaterials , which propose to combine protein design with the design of novel interfaces between synthetic materials and living cells , and to heteroepitaxy and electronic structure of high dielectric constant oxides .
Participants in the Center currently include 38 senior investigators , 7 postdoctoral associates , 24 graduate students , and support for undergraduates and K-12 teachers .
Professor Ravindra N. Bhatt directs the MRSEC .
East Asia marks one of the key areas for understanding the origin and prehistoric migrations of modern humans .
In particular , the relative continuity of hominid fossils found in China has challenged the well-known Out of Africa hypothesis which states that the modern humans originated only once in Africa , subsequently migrated out of Africa and replaced all the archaic forms of human in the rest part of the world .
The aforementioned observation suggests an independent origin of modern humans in East Asia and it contradicts the results obtained from genetic studies .
Unfortunately , no systematic genetic study has been conducted to describe the spectrum of genetic diversity in East Asian populations .
This project aims to describe the genetic profile of East Asian populations , to trace the ancient migratory routes in East Asia , and to study the origin of modern humans in this region by analyzing a battery of mtDNA , Y chromosomal , and autosomal markers .
This project will evaluate the genetic diversity of a group of linguistically and geographically diverse but ethnically defined populations in East Asia using a set of mtDNA , Y chromosomal , and autosomal polymorphisms .
It will investigate the prehistoric migrations of modern humans in this area and study the genesis of the significant genetic differences between northern and southern Mongoloids using both Y and mtDNA haplotypes .
Then , it will examine the competing hypotheses of origin of anatomically modern humans in East Asia .
Finally , it will characterize the relationship between linguistically versus geographically affiliated populations , and study the origin and dispersal of major language families in East Asia .
The class of microbes known as the macronuclear ciliates are instrumental in telomere research because its members have macronuclei that contain hundreds of thousands of linear gene-sized mini-chromosomes that have telomeres at both their ends .
Electron microscopy of macronuclear chromatin has shown that these chromosomes are organized into rosette structures in which the telomere ends are anchored in a central core structure while the DNA of the macronuclear chromosomes form large loops .
The X-ray crystal structures of two different macronuclear telomere complexes from Oxytricha nova show that its two-subunit telomere end binding protein ( OnTEBP ) can form two distinct macromolecular assemblies with telomeric single-stranded DNA .
One is a protective abssDNA end-capping complex involving both the a and b subunits of the protein and the other is a dimeric ( assDNA ) 2 complex that can link telomeres together .
These structures have led to a model of how the two OnTEBP complexes can mediate the condensation and decondensation of macronuclear chromatin through the formation of telomere anchored rosette structures .
This project examines the role of the ( assDNA ) 2 dimer in the formation of higher-order telomere complexes .
The experiments will use a multi-disciplinary approach to measure the kinetics and thermodynamics of DNA binding to OnTEBP complexes , elucidate the structural basis for the DNA dependent dimerization of the OnTEBP a subunit , and determine the role of ( assDNA ) 2 dimers in the formation of the abssDNA end capping complex .
The results will increase our understanding of the structure and dynamics of macromolecular complexes at telomeres.Telomeres are the protein-DNA complexes that protect the ends of linear eukaryotic chromosomes from recombination and degradation .
Telomeres are required for proper cell growth and viability .
This research project focuses on the protein-DNA and protein-protein interactions found at telomeres and the manner in which larger complexes formed via telomere-telomere interactions are assembled .
The results will provide insights into how the genetic integrity of chromosomes is maintained in cells .
Records from the 20th century indicate considerable variations in coastal hurricane activity along the Gulf and Atlantic coastlines of North America .
A decade of strong hurricanes on the Gulf coast is followed by a decade of severe hurricanes on the East coast .
Preliminary research suggests that these cycles are related to the location and strength of the subtropical Atlantic high-pressure cell ( Bermuda High ) , perhaps controlled by the strength of the North Atlantic Oscillation ( NAO ) .
To explore the dynamics of these relationships , it is necessary to consider records of past hurricane activity that predate the 20th century .
This research project will examine the role of the Bermuda High and the North Atlantic Oscillation in modulating major U.S. coastal hurricane activity on time scales ranging from the inter-annual to the millennial .
Lakes and marshes along the Atlantic coast and Gulf of Mexico coast will be cored , and the overwash sand deposits preserved in these coastal sediments will be studied to produce proxy records of past hurricane activity .
These geological records and evidence from historical documents will be collated with the modern instrumental records using geographic information systems ( GIS ) and statistics .
Past climate patterns will be inferred from measured and proxy indices .
The objectives of this project are to better understand climate patterns associated with variations in coastal hurricane activity and to improve return-period estimates of catastrophic events .
GIS will be used to collate the disparate historical archives into an electronic document .
Statistical models will be used to distinguish periods of activity from inactivity locally and regionally .
A probabilistic framework will be adopted to capture the varying levels of uncertainty in the data.Strong hurricanes have enormous societal impact .
High winds , heavy rain , and storm surge combine to create a catastrophic threat to life and property .
Coastal populations are growing faster than the population at large , thereby continually accentuating problem associated with strong hurricanes .
Careful examination of historical documents and fresh geological evidence gathered from Cape Cod and the Gulf coast through this project will provide valuable clues about the regularity of hurricanes in the distant past .
A careful study of these records will result in new knowledge about the relationship between climate variability and hurricane frequency , which will lead to a better understanding of the future threat of a hurricane disaster in the United States and nearby nations .
With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program , Professor Jay S. Siegel , of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Calfornia , San Diego , is studying the stereochemistry of nanoscale molecules .
Professor Siegel is carrying out the synthesis of molecules representing unusual topological stereoisomers , including chiral catenanes , enantiopure D3 trefoil knots , and Borromean links .
As these molecules are prepared , properties arising from their unusual structures , including highly efficient fluorescence emission , are studied .
The synthesis of bowl-shaped polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons similar to corranulene and the dynamics of their bowl-to-bowl inversion are also under investigation .
Chiral derivatives of these structures will be prepared and their chiroptical and molecular recognition properties , including affinities for ions , gases , and polar molecules , will be studied .
Liquid crystalline and dendrimeric corranulene-based structures will also be prepared.Molecular design , coupled with chemical synthesis , offers the best approach to the development of truly new molecular materials .
Nanoscale molecules represent a relatively unexplored family of synthetically designed chemical structures , intermediate between classical natural products and biomolecules and polymers .
Design principles for this area are still in their infancy , and the three-dimensional structures ( stereochemistry ) of these compounds remain fascinating .
Professor Jay S. Siegel , of the Department of Chemistry at the University of California at San Diego , applies experimental , theoretical , and computational techniques to the synthesis and stereochemical elucidation of nanoscale molecules representing a variety of classical stereochemistries which are unrepresented by synthetic organic chemical systems , including trefoil knots and Borromean links .
The amount of investment that females place in their offspring ( maternal investment ) , whether it is behavioral ( such as protection from predators ) or material ( such as milk ) , must be balanced against future efforts at reproducing .
Understanding how females of different species balance current and future investment in offspring provides insight on the evolution of alternative reproductive strategies .
In mammals , quantifying maternal investment can be difficult .
This occurs for several reasons 1 ) it is difficult to assign value to maternal behaviors ; 2 ) offspring may stay with their mothers for many years making observation periods unrealistically long ; and , 3 ) the material directly transferred from mother to offspring through gestation and lactation may be hard to determine .
Northern elephant seals ( Mirounga angustirostris ) provide a unique system within which to study maternal investment .
The investment period for elephant seals is limited to the period of lactation .
This period is brief ( ~ 25 days ) and almost all investment is given in the form of milk making it more feasible to quantify maternal investment .
Furthermore , elephant seal females do not eat or drink during lactation .
This combination of fasting and lactation constrains the ability of females to invest in their pups because the nutrients ( fat and protein ) used to meet their own energy needs are also used to produce milk for the pup .
Material and energy investment in elephant seal pups has been previously determined but its relationship to the energetic costs of the mother has not been characterized .
The study proposed here will investigate how lactating elephant seals utilize nutrient reserves to support their metabolism , identify and quantify physiological mechanisms that protect maternal nutrients for milk production , and characterize the strategy for nutrient use that contributes to maximizing investment in pups .
Isotopically labeled compounds will be used to study biochemical paths important to supplying energy to lactating female seals .
Specifically , changes in the importance of glucose and fat as fuel sources over the time course of lactation will be estimated and the contribution of glycerol , a byproduct of fat breakdown , to the production of glucose ( gluconeogenesis ) will be determined .
Insulin and glucagon , two hormones important in regulating how the body uses sugar and fat , will be manipulated to determine whether these hormones interact in a manner unique to this system .
This information will provide insight on how elephant seals optimize investment in their offspring under fasting constraints , and thus , will provide insight on ultimate strategies that contribute to future reproductive effort .
As part of the NSF-RUI initiative , undergraduates will be actively involved in field research and data analysis .
A graduate student , who will derive a research question for a thesis from the proposed work , will also be financially supported through this program .
Integration of undergraduate and graduate students into the research will insure that students experience an innovative and dynamic curriculum with an emphasis on integrative approaches to organismal biology .
and maintained .
In the most diverse habitats on Earth , the tropical rainforests , primates and other frugivores ( fruit-eaters ) play important roles by dispersing the seeds of many trees .
In this symposium we will make a global comparison of tropical frugivores and plant communities .
We will bring together for the first time researchers studying birds , bats , primates , elephants , and other animals with plant ecologists to identify and compare the keystone plant species that sustain a diversity of animals in different regions .
By bringing together some of the world 's finest tropical biologists to compare their knowledge , this symposium will try to create a tool for rapidly identifying the most important species for maintaining biodiversity .
We will also study the ways that the loss of such species can affect ecosystems.There are three aims of the symposium first , to identify and compare the key plants which sustain rainforest animal diversity ; second , to identify those animals which are of greatest significance to these plant communities ; and third , to study the importance of these interactions to conservation .
The information collected in this forum will advance the field of ecology and aid the scientific management of endangered species and habitats .
It will also bring students together with renowned scholars in the field , and build international collaboration on conservation strategies .
This Small Business Innovation Research ( SBIR ) Phase I project proposes to develop formulations of natural fatty and organic acids as alternatives to traditional fungicides for the control of diseases in fruits such as grapes , blueberries , strawberries and raspberries .
In the course of this project , the efficacy of these formulations as pre-harvest and post-harvest treatments for disease control in a number of fruits will be determined .
Replicated trials will be conducted in the laboratory and on commercial and university farms .
The follow on Phase II project will incorporate more extensive field testing to determine efficacy against a wider range of pathogens under various climatic conditions.The commercial application of this project is in the area of agriculture .
Although the rational-choice model used by economists has yielded an array of insights across a broad range of human activities , research from psychology suggests that it is inaccurate in some systematic and important ways .
This project will continue an agenda of integrating psychologically more realistic assumptions about human behavior into formal economic models .
Much of the research will focus on intertemporal choice , and in particular on two specific more realistic assumptions .
First , whereas the rational-choice model assumes that people do not change their willingness to delay gratification over time , evidence suggests that , from a prior perspective , people would like to behave patiently , while at the moment of action , people behave impatiently .
Second , whereas the rational-choice model assumes that people correctly predict future tastes , evidence suggests people tend to exaggerate the degree to which their future tastes will resemble their current tastes .
This project will investigate the implications of these errors in three distinct environments .
First , the project will study procrastination , both patterns of procrastinatory behavior and policies designed to combat procrastination .
Second , the project will study distortions in consumption behavior when the pleasure generated by consumption depends on one 's accustomed or habitual consumption level .
Third , the project will study the consumption of harmful addictive substances , and in particular whether and how these errors can cause people to hurt themselves by developing harmful addictions ( the rational-choice model can attribute harmful addictions only to bad luck ) .
The project will also investigate additional more realistic assumptions.This research , and the broader agenda of which it is a part , will dramatically improve economic analysis , and promote a more realistic analysis of policies designed to address savings behavior , addiction , procrastination , obesity , and similar phenomena .
For many questions , the standard rational-choice model provides a satisfactory apparatus .
But for other questions , such as why do people procrastinate , develop harmful addictions , or are overweight , the rational-choice model is importantly flawed , requiring implausible explanations for observed behavior and leading to harmful policy recommendations .
The research demonstrates how economists can derive alternative more realistic assumptions from research in psychology , and how these alternative assumptions can provide better explanations for behavior , and yield more sensible policy recommendations .
This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project intends to fabricate , and test a condensation nucleus counter ( CNC ) of the turbulent-mixing type , with a detection limit below 2 nm particle diameter , and able to measure the size distribution of aerosol nanoparticles .
A novelty of this apparatus is that its super-saturation level can be adjusted quickly and accurately along a wide range .
This ability , along with the dependence between critical super-saturation and embryo diameter , will make it possible to measure in real time the size distribution of the nanometric fraction of the aerosol .
It will be shown that the design of this CNC effectively delays the onset of homogeneous nucleation ; uncharged particles smaller than 3 nm in diameter are readily activated ; a detection limit below 2 nm for uncharged particles can be achieved by using the appropriate condensing vapor ; and charged nanoparticles of arbitrary small size are detected .
Note that this demonstrated detection limit is substantially smaller than that of the best CNC commercially available ( TSI model 3025A , 3 nm detection limit ) .
Three tasks have been identified to materialize the goals of this proposal design and fabrication of a CNC prototype ; experimental demonstration of the performance of the CNC ; and execution of fundamental research on heterogeneous nucleation .
The overall work will eventually lead to the commercialization of an improved CNC .
The main fields of application include bio-aerosol detection , air quality testing , environmental studies , particle emission testing , and materials , pharmaceutical and basic aerosol research .
This turbulent-mixing CNC will enable the analysis of macromolecules via liquid chromatography with a very significant gain of sensitivity with respect to more common schemes .
This analytical application has considerable commercial potential .
Macroeconomists in business and government operate in a data-rich environment .
For example , in the United States data on thousands of economic time series are available monthly .
Recently , there has been theoretical and applied interest in developing forecasting methods that exploit this wealth of information in a way that is systematic , replicable , and subject to scientific analysis .
The results have been encouraging the first few estimated factors from large dynamic factor models ( hundreds of predictors ) appear to have predictive content for the main economic aggregates -real activity and inflation - that is unavailable in smaller systems .
Within the past year , two Central Banks ( the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and the Bank of Italy/CEPR ) have started releasing real-time many-variable activity indexes .
Research to date on many-predictor macroeconomic forecasts has centered on approximate factor structures that , while useful as data reduction methods , constitute only one way to approach large data sets ; moreover , the models investigated so far are essentially time-invariant .
The objective of the research outlined in this proposal is to move beyond the first few estimated factors from time-invariant systems and thereby to investigate many-predictor time series forecasts in potentially time-varying systems .
This proposal contains four specific projects within this broader research agenda .
The objective of the first project is to develop empirical Bayes methods for linear time- invariant models that exploit information in the many predictors , beyond what is contained in their first few estimated dynamic factors .
The purpose of the second project is to estimate linear prediction bounds , that is , upper bounds on the population of forecasts made using linear time-invariant equations with many predictors .
There is substantial evidence that low-dimensional macroeconomic forecasting relations are unstable over time .
The next two projects extend the work on many-predictor forecasting to models with time variation .
The objective of the third project is to develop tests for time variation in models with many predictors and to develop and to implement estimators that exploit this time variation .
The objective of the fourth project is to provide a coherent resolution of the forecasting combining puzzle ( the result that simple means or trimmed means of panels of macroeconomic forecasts outperform individual forecasts and typically are stable even when the individual forecasts are not ) ; it is hoped that this will lead to many-predictor forecasting methods that are robust to time variation .
Finally , it is proposed to apply some of the methods developed in this research to a different problem , instrumental variables regression with many weak instruments , and to continue other ongoing work in the area of weak instruments .
It is hoped that the proposed research will have broader impacts on practical forecasting .
For example , the ongoing real-time projects at U.S. and European central banks builds on previous work by the Principal Investigators and others on high-dimensional systems , and it is hoped that the tools developed in the proposed research will be useful in those and related projects .
Our understanding of eyewitness identification has increased considerably in the last 20 years .
There is now a long list of empirical results that have been shown to be both reliable and illuminating with respect to the underlying psychological mechanisms .
This research builds upon this foundation to develop a unified theory of the memory and decision processes that witnesses use when they are presented with a lineup and must make an identification decision , including the decision to not make an identification .
This research will use a computer simulation program , Witness , where the model 's fundamental assumptions are formalized mathematically .
This model will be used to motivate and interpret the results of several experiments that are designed to address the fundamental question How do witnesses make identification decisions ?
The experiments specifically test the decision rule presently incorporated in the model .
The model will be fit to data from experiments that carefully covary suspect and foil similarity ; examine the relationship between suspect-matched and description-matched lineups ; compare showups to sequential and simultaneous lineups ; and examine how more specific witness instructions affect identification .
This Doctoral Dissertation Research Support project explains persistent policy differences between presidents and congresses , independent of party .
The prevalent view is that the President represents the public interest and the Congress the special interests .
The investigator asserts that presidents are likelier than Members of Congress ( MC 's ) to act upon their convictions , which will reflect any dominant view among elites , unless a dissenting lobby is bound to their party by the issue in question .
Presidents are only constrained by lobbies linked to their parties by an issue , while MC 's are sensitive to both the secondary demands of party-linked groups and those of no-party lobbies .
The President is more apt to act on principle than is an MC ( and hence Congress generally ) since his actions are more influential and he is less vulnerable than the atomostic Congress to lobbies ' tactics of Divide and conquer and targeting recalcitrants .
Persistent interbranch differences emerge when unified elite opinion influences presidents of both parties but lobbies constrain Congress .
Unlike extant work the student 's theory explains how the same issue can be partisan in one era and marked by inter-branch conflict in another .
It is also free from normative assumptions.The student will undertake two two-week trips to the Library of Congress ( LOC ) and these allow him to fully operationalize a key variable in his theory , elite opinion .
By coding and tabulating the editorial positions of a sample of papers stratified by region and partisan tendency on three issues , trade , gun control and veterans programs from 1910-2000 he will be able to show the degree to which an issue is contested or consensual among elite opinion .
This enables him to test his theory in a timely manner.The database assembled should prove useful to scholars pursuing other questions in this area of inquiry .
This dissertation investigates whether environmental regulation entails different marginal costs for internationally-oriented firms than for domestically-oriented firms .
Two explanatory models generate competing expectations about the relationship between globalization and environmental regulation .
One posits a positive relationship between the two , and the other offers a negative prediction of a race to the bottom .
Hypotheses from these models are tested using an across-industry , cross-national research design to determine the relation of an industry 's international economic ties to the degree of regulatory stringency for that industry .
This project also explores the role of comparative institutional factors , including divided government and party discipline , in shaping incentives for politicians to either pursue the public good of environmental protection or shelter particular interest groups from the burden of environmental regulation Data will be collected from nine industries in four Latin American countries , as well as on the environmental policymaking institutions of those states .
This research will contribute to the debate about globalization and domestic regulation by providing empirical data on environmental regulatory stringency across industries and by systematically testing the relationship between economic internationalization and regulatory strength .
More broadly , this project may inform the study not only of environmental standards in developing countries , but of other social regulation and economic policies as well .
This Small Business Innovation Research ( SBIR ) Phase I project concerns the development of an electrochemical-based array nondestructive testing and evaluation ( NDE ) system for the detection of corrosion at the microscale level .
Formation of small flaws of a destructive nature results during corrosion of a number of engineering metals and alloys used in transportation , microelectronics , electrical power production , and hazardous waste containment .
The stability of these materials is determined by the extent to which a high integrity passive oxide film forms and is retained during continuous exposure to the ambient environment .
Localized corrosion due to breakdown in these oxide films is responsible for limiting the lifetime of components made from these materials .
The key to avoid flaw formation in engineering metals and alloys is the detection of early stages of corrosion .
The proposed technology will provide spatially resolved information on the corrosion process at the microscale level as well as information on corrosion rates .
The fabrication and test of a lab-scale electrochemical array-based corrosion sensor will be carried out during the Phase I project.There are large potential commercial applications for this technology in various industries , such as aerospace ( defense and commercial ) , marine and automotive industries , electric utility plants , chemical processing plants , refineries , microelectronics , electrical power production , and hazardous waste containment .
This project implements for the first time on world trade data a model that appropriately predicts bilateral trade in both homogeneous and differentiated goods according to the distinct logic of trade in each .
This study examines bilateral exports for 30 industries and 61 countries .
This study takes as a maintained assumption that there are two types of goods the differentiated goods contemplated in the conventional gravity framework and a set of homogeneous goods .
The methodological contribution in this study will be the development of a procedure to identify each of the two types of goods and to predict the trade patterns in each .
This is undertaken in the context of maximum likelihood estimation .
The results will provide a better understanding of the determinants of bilateral trade patterns and balances .
An improved model of bilateral trade may also be important for consideration of many problems for which the gravity framework has been a key input .
Finally , one output of this project will be the program used to compute the bilateral trade patterns , so that others can easily apply the methodology .
The objective of this project is the development of a quantitative tool that can be used to predict chromatographic performance as a function of adsorbed protein structure for given protein mixture/media/mobile phase combinations and to select/design hydrophobic media and mobile phase conditions .
This tool will promote the process-scale use of hydrophobic media , resulting in simpler , more robust processes that reduce cost-of-goods and time-to-market for new and off-patent protein drugs .
This project will advance the state of the art of hydrophobic chromatographic systems by addressing the following specific aims ( 1 ) validate generic mechanisms for protein unfolding on adsorption to hydrophobic chromatographic media , ( 2 ) correlate linear and nonlinear protein-media interaction behavior using quantitative structure retention relationships ( QSRRs ) to connect protein retention to descriptors of native protein , perturbed protein , surface and solution physical properties , ( 3 ) develop a fundamental theory for protein-media interactions using a Langevin dipole approach to calculate protein-surface preferential interaction coefficients ( PICs ) , and ( 4 ) predict chromatographic performance for complex mixtures by coupling QSRR correlations and/or PIC theory for protein-media interactions with a macroscopic/engineering description of chromatographic operation.This project is a collaborative effort among researchers at Carnegie Mellon University , Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and the University of Virginia with expertise in biochemical engineering , applied biophysics , chromatographic separations , and thermodynamic modeling and computational chemistry .
This collaboration , with the proposed regular program of team colloquia , laboratory rotations and industrial internships , is expected to provide a rich research and educational environment for the students and faculty alike .
Faced with an economy in recession , policy-makers today have proposed a variety of federal programs and projects that they believe will stimulate the sluggish economy .
An underlying premise of the recent stimulus proposals is that the federal government can successfully use fiscal policy to grow the economy .
The objective of this research is to better understand the economic impact of such fiscal stimulus .
Perhaps the greatest example of federal peace-time fiscal intervention was the New Deal in which President Franklin D. Roosevelt introduced a myriad of programs designed to aid in the relief , recovery , and reform of the depressed economy .
Despite the great importance of this remarkable episode of U.S. economic history , there has been very little attempt to quantitatively analyze the economic effects of the New Deal .
To help fill this gap this project will provide a series of studies on the impact of the New Deal on a variety of measures of economic activity , including real estate wealth , housing values and construction , retail sales , manufacturing activity , agricultural development , criminal behavior , as well as demographic changes attributable to the New Deal .
Since most of the research focuses on the impact of the New Deal at the county level , it is important to control for spillover effects from New Deal spending in neighboring counties and economic activity in neighboring areas .
In addition , there may be unmeasurable economic shocks in one county that might spillover into neighboring counties .
Measuring the impact of the New Deal on local economies is complicated further because in most cases we probably can not treat New Deal spending as purely exogenous .
New Deal expenditures might have been related to economic activity in conflicting ways .
Given the stated goals of the New Deal , we might anticipate that the New Dealers distributed more resources to areas with lower incomes or to areas with higher unemployment or slower growth .
On the other hand , many of the New Deal programs required that the state or local government have the resources to seek help for projects from the federal government or go even further by providing matching funds to help finance the projects .
Thus , New Deal spending might have been positively related to measures of economic activity .
To deal with the geographic spillover effects and simultaneity issues , we have adopted an econometric model that incorporates both the simultaneous relationship between New Deal spending and economic activity and the spatial correlation inherent in the deterministic and random components of the empirical model .
This research program takes advantage of the new developments in spatial econometric theory that enable researchers to better understand the impact of public policy , while controlling for the geographic spillovers and simultaneity problems that inevitably undermine precise measurement .
Providing a better understanding of the economic impact of the New Deal is highly valuable on at least two general levels .
First , despite the significance of the Great Depression and the New Deal to U.S. economic history , very little is known about the economic consequences of President Roosevelt 's experiment .
Therefore , this research will add significantly to the history of the Great Depression .
Second , the usefulness of government spending to stimulate a stagnant economy remains a deeply controversial modern public policy debate .
Thus , one of the central goals of this research project is to shed light on this question by looking to a time when government intervention was likely to have the greatest impact - the Great Depression .
This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes to develop novel approaches for the synthesis of carcinogen-modified oligodeoxynucleotides ( ODNs ) and carcinogen deoxynucleoside monomer adducts that can be used in physical , chemical , conformational , and biological studies , and as reference standards in both academic and commercial work .
These reagents are difficult to acquire and they are available to only a few large laboratories with sufficient resources to synthesize them .
The proposed methodology will reduce the cost of synthesizing these types of materials substantially , resulting in the widespread availability of these important biological components on a cost-effective commercial scale .
One of the attractive features of the proposed methodology is that it will be applicable not only to carcinogen-modified ODNs , but will also be employed for the construction of ODNs modified with other types of agents , such as , tethers and dyes .
Tethered ODNs can be attached to arrays and used as targets for gene sequence analysis.The commercial applications of this project are straightforward and involve direct sales of the modified ODNs and carcinogen adduct monomers to the academic community for fundamental research investigations and to industrial firms for environmental monitoring .
Committees play critical roles in collective decision-making such as in Congress and in many other situations ( e.g. , board of directors , universities , jury , sports judging ) they gather and report information , propose and choose policies .
Severe incentive problems may arise in the committee decision-making process when committee members have different policy preferences and/or different information .
In such circumstances , what are the important factors affecting effective committee decision-making and how should committees be structured to facilitate it ?
This research project will develop several mathematical models of committee decisions to investigate various aspects of these questions .
The first model focuses on the informational role of committees , in an environment where committee members may shirk in gathering information and may distort reports of their findings to manipulate collective decisions .
Questions to study include how much information can be incorporated in the decisions and what is the optimal decision rule and optimal committee size .
A second model is concerned with optimal voting rules for committees who vote on policy proposals developed by an agent , focusing on trade-offs among several effects ( 1 ) information requirement for changing policies ; ( 2 ) distortions by the agent ; and ( 3 ) the agent 's incentives to gather good information .
In a third model , the bargaining approach is used to formulate the idea that efficiency of the committee 's decision-making deteriorates with heterogeneity of its members ' interests , because heterogeneity makes compromises among members more difficult .
The research project will also investigate why monetary transfers are rarely observed in real world committee decisions , while theoretically they can be quite useful because they can reduce distribution effects of committee decisions by having winners compensate losers , thus enabling the committee to focus solely on the efficiency aspects of its decisions.Understanding committee decision-making is important for understanding real world institutions and policies , and may provide suggestions to make committee decision-making more effective .
In recent years , research on committee decisions has broadened its scope to examine organizational features of committee decisions .
This research project builds on the existing literature and tries to shed new light on several aspects of committee organizational structure .
The results of the project may generate theoretical and practical implications on committee size , decision rules , voting rules , restrictions on transfers , etc .
Virtually all of the work in continuous-time finance assumes that the prices of securities follow an exogenously specified process .
However , the prices of securities are in fact determined day-by-day and minute-by-minute by the balancing of supply and demand .
A complete economic model of continuous-time trading requires the derivation of the pricing process as an equilibrium determined by more primitive data of the economy , in particular the agents ' information , utility functions , and endowments .
The known results on existence of equilibrium in multi-agent continuous-time financial markets are limited to the case in which markets are dynamically complete , i.e .
the available securities either include a complete set of Arrow-Debreu contingent claims , or it is possible to construct a complete set of Arrow-Debreu contingent claims from the available securities .
The assumption that the available securities include a complete set of Arrow-Debreu contingent claims is highly implausible ; the assumption that one can construct a complete set of Arrow-Debreu contingent claims from the available securities is highly endogenous , since dynamic completeness is a property of the prices of the securities , not the underlying data of the economy .
Without equilibrium underpinnings , the economic foundations of finance models are seriously in question .
The main goal of the project is to prove the existence of equilibrium prices in continuous-time finance models with dynamically incomplete markets .
The second goal is to explore the implications of equilibrium for the nature of securities price processes.This research is intended to provide solid economic foundations for continuous-time finance .
In particular , it will provide alternative pricing processes to those which are currently studied in continuous-time finance ; these alternative pricing processes may provide a better fit to actual stock market data than those currently in use .
This research has the potential to benefit society by improving the accuracy of pricing in securities markets .
First , because the research leads to specific predictions about the interaction of prices for different types of assets , it should lead to more accurate pricing across markets , such as housing , mortgages , stocks and bonds , which currently function largely independently .
Second , it should lead to more accurate pricing of options in the situation where the exercise price of the option differs significantly the current price of the underlying stock .
This project investigates whether investor behavior in stock markets is influenced by social interaction .
One channel through which social interaction might influence investors is that they spread information and ideas about stocks to one another directly , through word-of-mouth communication .
However , in spite of their familiarity , such hypotheses about social interaction have received little direct support in stock-market data .
In an effort to bring large-sample evidence to bear on these questions , this project conducts two studies of social interaction and investor behavior in stock markets .
The first study investigates the idea that stock-market participation by households is influenced by social interaction .
A simple model is built in which any given social investor finds it more attractive to invest in the market when the participation rate among his peers is higher .
The model predicts higher participation rates among social investors than among non-socials .
The theory is tested using data from the Health and Retirement Study .
Social households are defined as those who interact with their neighbors , or who attend church .
The investigators test whether the social investors are indeed substantially more likely to invest in the stock market than non-social households , controlling for other factors like wealth , race , education and risk tolerance .
The investigators also test an auxiliary prediction of their model that the impact of sociability is stronger in states where stock-market participation rates are higher .
A second study investigates word-of-mouth effects on the holdings and trades of money managers .
The idea is a very simple one , premised on the assumption that fund managers who work in the same city are more likely to come into direct contact with one another , and hence to exchange ideas by word-of-mouth .
Consider for example a fund manager working for the Fidelity fund family , which is located in Boston , and her decision of whether or not to buy , say , shares of Intel in a given quarter .
Our basic prediction is that this decision will be more heavily influenced by the decisions of fund managers working for the Putnam family , which is also located in Boston , than by the decisions of fund managers located in other cities .
Using a large database of mutual fund holdings , the investigators look to see whether a mutual-fund manager is more likely to hold ( or buy , or sell ) a particular stock in any quarter if other managers from different fund families located in the same city are holding ( or buying , or selling ) that same stock .
In these regressions , we are able to control for the distance between the fund manager and the stock in question and for heterogeneity in investment styles .
Finally , in a model in which investors spread information and ideas about stocks directly to one another by word of mouth , it takes time for ideas about stocks to travel over large distances , much as with a contagious disease .
The investigators can test for such trading dynamics by checking whether a given fund manager 's trades responds to the trades of other fund managers with more of a lag when these other managers are located in more distant cities .
This Small Business Innovation Research ( SBIR ) Phase I project focuses on providing ambient power for wireless smart sensor units used for condition-based monitoring .
Specifically , this project is to develop a Micro-Electro-Mechanical System ( MEMS ) -based power-scavenging module .
Current research in the area of ambient power has established a strong foundation from which future solutions in the area of condition-based maintenance will take shape .
Research will also be performed on rare earth magnets to custom design thin permanent magnets that will produce a high-flux density in the compactly designed system .
The proposed component will provide power through the conversion of ambient machine vibration using electromagnetic induction .
Design objectives include the optimization of energy-scavenging efficiency in varying environmental conditions , operating conditions , and system types .
The proposed system uses MEMS technology to realize small dimensions ( one-inch square and less than 0.5 cm .
thick ) and energy storage capabilities.Commercial applications include industrial machinery , vehicles , air conditioners , and refrigerators .
Additional options are large markets such as building controls and manufacturing .
0214212CapoThis award provides three years of Phase I research laboratory technician support in the Department of Geology and Planetary Science Geochemistry Facility at the University of Pittsburgh .
The University is providing 50 % of the salary and fringe benefits for this position .
The facilities comprise sample preparation , clean chemistry , and instrumentation laboratories .
Major instruments include an inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometer ( ICP-AES ) and an NSF-funded multicollector thermal ionization mass spectrometer ( TIMS ) .
The research technician is responsible for day-to-day operation of the labs , maintenance of equipment , training of collaborators and students , and assistance with method development .
In addition to facilitating hands-on class and outreach activities , this position will provide vital support for research projects focused on Quaternary soil development and paleoclimatology , modeling of weathering in watersheds , development of acid mine drainage , Precambrian paleoenvironments , and igneous geochemistry .
*** The Center for Engineering Logistics and Distribution ( CELDi ) is a new multi-university , multi-disciplinary Industry/University Cooperative Research Center ( I/UCRC ) .
The vision for the center is to provide integrated solutions to logistics problems , through modeling , analysis and intelligent-systems technologies.The four universities involved in this proposal , the University of Arkansas , serving as the lead institution , the University of Oklahoma , the University of Louisville , and Oklahoma State University are assuming a leadership role in engineering logistics research and education.The scope of CELDi will address ( 1 ) value-adding processes that create time and place utility ( transportation , material handling , and distribution ) , ( 2 ) value-sustaining processes that prolong useful life ( maintenance , repair , and rework ) , and ( 3 ) value-recovering processes that conserve scarce resources and enhance societal goodwill ( returns , refurbishment , and recycling ) .
0214206WithersThis grant provides support for an upgrade of the computational facilities at the Center for Earthquake Research and Information ( CERI ) , University of Memphis .
Equipment to be purchased will include two SUN multi-CPU severs , a RAID system , a tape backup system , two color printers , and several individual workstations .
This equipment will facilitate a multitude of CERI functions including , a role as an information center for state and local governments interested in mitigating seismic hazards surrounding the New Madrid Fault Zone , maintenance of a public outreach program on earthquake hazards , maintenance of the central and eastern U.S. seismicity database in collaboration with the USGS , and basic seismological and geodetic research and education .
Several researchers at CERI including Mitch Withers , Arch Johnston , Michael Ellis , Robert Smalley and Chuck Langston will employ this equipment for research in earthquake seismology , mantle tomography and active margin plate kinematics .
*** 0210185SES-0214296PI ( s ) Jay TeachmanLucky TedrowWestern Washington UniversityThe military is the single largest employer of young men in the United States , and military recruitment is an often hotly debated topic centering on issues such as access , equality of representation by race and gender , and transferability of training to the civilian labor market .
This project examines the determinants and consequences of military service by studying varied interrelationships between military service and numerous life-course outcomes .
The PIs will investigate several possible explanations for observed effects of military services .
First , men who serve in the military may be a select group who would otherwise be expected to vary in their life-course transitions .
Second , military service alters the roles and responsibilities of young men for extended periods of time , often subjecting them to stressful and unfamiliar environments .
Such may lead to lasting differences in life-course patterns .
Third , military service ma have an impact on subsequent life-course events by interrupting other events in the life course .
Three nationally representative databases The National Longitudinal Study of Mature Men , The National Longitudinal Study of Young Men , and the National Longitudinal Study of Youth , will be analyzed .
These will allow the investigators to identify differential characteristics of young men , who enter the military , to untangle and model the life course processes by which military service affects subsequent life-course evens , and to determine how these processes might have changed from World War II through the Vietnam era and AVF .
The project will contribute to our understanding of the processes by which military service affects the fluid , and often disorderly , life-course experiences of young men .
This Small Business Innovation Research ( SBIR ) Phase I project involves the exploitation of nano-materials as optical based chemical sensors .
This innovative approach to chemical sensing will take advantage of the material 's quantum size effects , such as enhanced absorption and photoluminescence properties ( sensitivity ) , high surface areas for analyze sensing ( miniaturization ) , and ease of synthetic preparation ( specificity ) .
The use of optical based sensors provides additional advantages , such as no electrical noise , fast response , ease of miniaturization , safe near flammables , more durable than electronics , and applications to remote sensing .
The characterization of the optical and electronic properties of the nanomaterials is critical to their development into the proposed optical sensor arrays.This research will also contribute to the increasing information database of nanomaterials as they pertain to advanced electronic materials .
The research will lay the groundwork for fabricating multi-analyze optical sensors .
The technology , once successfully developed , will be used the semiconductor manufacturing industry .
Consider a researcher who must choose between two rival models , based on how well those models explain the behavior in a given set of data .
Suppose one is a strategic choice model and the other is a nonstrategic model -that is , the models have different functional forms .
How would the researcher discriminate between these models ?
In other words , how would she determine which of the models is better ?
In this project , Principal Investigators answer this question by merging two promising areas of methodological research , and then use those methods to analyze international conflict .
The first line of research , by Signorino and various coauthors , has demonstrated that traditional specifications of statistical models are generally inconsistent with strategic theories of political behavior .
The main message of this research has been that the functional form of one 's statistical model must be consistent with the relationships implied by the behavior under analysis , or the statistical inferences will be invalid .
However , aside from comparisons of likelihood values and percent correctly predicted , Signorino has not provided a more rigorous framework for comparing ( nonnested ) strategic models against one another , or against nonstrategic models .
Clarke , on the other hand , has engaged in a second line of research , addressing comparative model testing for nonnested models .
The main message of his research has been that nonnested model testing requires special techniques that are unknown to most political scientists .
New and existing nonnested testing methods have been developed and adapted in prior research to deal with competing limited dependent variable models .
The competing models in this literature , however , have only been nonnested in terms of their covanates .
Testing strategic choice models against each other or against nonstrategic models requires discriminating between models that are nonnested in terms of their functional forms .
The research conducted by Signorino and by Clarke is clearly complimentary .
By developing nonnested tests for strategic choice models , Signorino and Clarke will provide the necessary tools for assessing whether strategic models outperform their nonstrategic rivals , or whether certain strategic specifications outperform other strategic specifications .
By addressing strategic choice models , Signorino and Clarke will expand the set of functional forms beyond that currently available in the nonnested testing literature .
As in previous work on nonnested model testing , the proposed research will make use of classical , Bayesian , and nonparametric statistical techniques .
The project goals include * Adapting absolute discrimination tests ( such as the Cox test ) for strategic models * Adapting and developing relative discrimination tests ( such as the Vuong test , Clarke 's non- parametric test , and Bayes factors ) for strategic models .
* Refining current Bayesian techniques for use with strategic models , and conducting Bayesian estimation of strategic models ( to conduct tests based on Bayes factors ) .
* Applying these methods to models of deterrence , alliance politics , and the effect of domestic politics on militarized interstate disputes .
* Incorporating these techniques into currently available software ( e.g .
STRAT and WinBUGS ) .
By combining these lines of research , future scholars will be able not only to develop statistical models that are truly consistent with their theories , but also to test those theories against each other .
The attainment of these goals will allow the scientific study of international relations to move significantly beyond its current state .
The goals of this three-year research project include investigation of the operation of devices based on alternate device technologies , including p-channel strained SixGe1-x and narrow-width SOI device structures .
The simulation tools that will be developed for this purpose will begin at the semi-classical Boltzmann equation level in the hierarchy of approximations , and extend to direct simulation of quantum transport within various approximation schemes at the most fundamental level .
The main goals are todevelop tools based on direct solution of the semiclassical Boltzman equation using either full-band or non-parabolic energy band models .
These techniques will be combined with robust , multi-processor field solvers based on multi-grid and Bi-CGSTAB methods including non-uniform grids for arbitrary device geometries .
Discrete impurity effects will be included through a quantum molecular dynamics scheme to assess the fluctuation in device operating characteristics based on random impurity distributions .
Collaboration with industrial partners will be undertaken for comparison and calibration with state of the art device technologies .
Due to the computational demands of both 3D semi-classical and quantum device modeling , the proposed research will be supported by high-performance computing environments based on distributed workstation clusters .
In addition to research , there will be significant educational enhancements that will accompany this research project .
These include introduction of new classes in the area of Computational Electronics , Web-based activities and inclusion of minorities and undergraduates in research .
As such , they will help introduce our graduate students to the challenging world of Computational Electronics in both Industry and Academia .
This Small Business Innovation Research ( SBIR ) Phase I project seeks to develop an efficient and reliable enhanced Raman spectroscopy probe by integrating a microspherical resonator with nanoparticles providing Surface Enhanced Raman scattering .
This spectral information provides a chemical fingerprint and analyte identification .
However , broader application of this technology is hindered by the powerful laser sources and sensitive optical detection equipment that the inherently weak Raman scattering requires .
The proposed probe addresses these limitations by ( 1 ) locally increasing the light intensity at the probe head with an optical resonator to permit the use of lower power sources and ( 2 ) improving the Raman scattering efficiency with metallic nanoparticles to permit the use of less sensitive detection equipment .
Raman spectroscopy has wide commercial application in chemical process monitoring , pharmaceutical analysis , and environmental site monitoring because it provides rich spectra arising from the chemical structure of the analyte .
In addition to expanded use in the above-mentioned industries , reducing the cost and size of Raman spectroscopy equipment will enable point-of-care systems for medical diagnostics and field portable systems for rapid identification of chemical unknowns from accidental or intentional releases .
Macroeconomists in business and government operate in a data-rich environment .
For example , in the United States data on thousands of economic time series are available monthly .
Recently , there has been theoretical and applied interest in developing forecasting methods that exploit this wealth of information in a way that is systematic , replicable , and subject to scientific analysis .
The results have been encouraging the first few estimated factors from large dynamic factor models ( hundreds of predictors ) appear to have predictive content for the main economic aggregates -real activity and inflation - that is unavailable in smaller systems .
Within the past year , two Central Banks ( the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and the Bank of Italy/CEPR ) have started releasing real-time many-variable activity indexes .
Research to date on many-predictor macroeconomic forecasts has centered on approximate factor structures that , while useful as data reduction methods , constitute only one way to approach large data sets ; moreover , the models investigated so far are essentially time-invariant .
The objective of the research outlined in this proposal is to move beyond the first few estimated factors from time-invariant systems and thereby to investigate many-predictor time series forecasts in potentially time-varying systems .
This proposal contains four specific projects within this broader research agenda .
The objective of the first project is to develop empirical Bayes methods for linear time- invariant models that exploit information in the many predictors , beyond what is contained in their first few estimated dynamic factors .
The purpose of the second project is to estimate linear prediction bounds , that is , upper bounds on the population of forecasts made using linear time-invariant equations with many predictors .
There is substantial evidence that low-dimensional macroeconomic forecasting relations are unstable over time .
The next two projects extend the work on many-predictor forecasting to models with time variation .
The objective of the third project is to develop tests for time variation in models with many predictors and to develop and to implement estimators that exploit this time variation .
The objective of the fourth project is to provide a coherent resolution of the forecasting combining puzzle ( the result that simple means or trimmed means of panels of macroeconomic forecasts outperform individual forecasts and typically are stable even when the individual forecasts are not ) ; it is hoped that this will lead to many-predictor forecasting methods that are robust to time variation .
Finally , it is proposed to apply some of the methods developed in this research to a different problem , instrumental variables regression with many weak instruments , and to continue other ongoing work in the area of weak instruments .
It is hoped that the proposed research will have broader impacts on practical forecasting .
For example , the ongoing real-time projects at U.S. and European central banks builds on previous work by the Principal Investigators and others on high-dimensional systems , and it is hoped that the tools developed in the proposed research will be useful in those and related projects .
EAR-0214547KressIn August , 1997 , the Department of Geology acquired a number of valuable pieces of experimental equipment from Stanford University .
Equipment includes 1 ) A high-capacity 1.4 GPa Harwood two-stage gas compressor and smaller third stage vernier pump .
2 ) Two 5 cm bore internally heated pressure vessels and a smaller 4.1 cm bore vessel , all with a design pressure of 1 GPa .
3 ) A large collection of valves gauges and tubing .
Building on funds already provided by the University of Washington , the investigators will assemble this equipment into a working state-of the-art high-pressure high-temperature experimental facility .
This facility will be used for experimental exploration of geological problems under conditions ranging from ambient to 1 GPa ( 10,000 bars ) pressure and temperatures up to 1,500 degrees centigrade under controlled or monitored fugacities of hydrogen , oxygen and sulfur .
This PT range is not accurately accessible by any other commonly used experimental method .
This facility will be capable of exploring conditions found over most of Earth 's continental crust and down to upper oceanic mantle .
This pressure and temperature range also includes the probable source region for Martian shergottites ( Ghosal et al. , 1998 ) .
The large volume of this experimental apparatus and the ability to incorporate numerous electrical feedthroughs into the high pressure environment allows tremendous flexibility in experimental design .
Furthermore , because the pressure medium is a gas , pressures can be measured accurately , and one can be assured that the pressure experienced by the sample is entirely isotropic .
Ultrasonic experiments are proposed that can only be done in this type of device .
*** This research will develop accurate and powerful Bayesian modeling and computational methods for the problem of response time ( RT ) analysis .
Although Bayesian techniques are well established in other fields , social scientists very rarely use them because they require a considerable investment in computational resources as well as additional statistical training .
The project will develop a number of strategies that will improve the analysis of RT data , including analyses that consider theories about how RTs are produced and new procedures that can help untrained practitioners use Bayesian methods without too much inconvenience .
The study also undertakes a program of education and dissemination to improve the overall quality of statistical analyses of RT data .
Thus , this research will result in new and better statistical procedures specific for RT ( and similar chronometric ) data.The importance of this project is considerable .
How well a person performs a task is often evaluated by way of how quickly he or she can respond during the task .
Measurements of RTs are important for both theoretical and pragmatic reasons .
Theoretically , RTs are used to test hypotheses about cognitive structure , the ways in which people use and process information , and how changes in the environment influence human behavior .
Pragmatically , RTs are important for evaluating human performance in many areas .
They assist machine interface design decisions , such as the optimal way to present information to a pilot or the best place where to put a turn signal lever .
They are also used in medicine ; diagnoses of some organic brain disorders such as Alzheimer 's disease or Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder can be informed by a patient 's RTs on certain kinds of tests .
Many of the statistical procedures used to test hypotheses based on RTs are suboptimal .
They depend on oversimplifying assumptions about RT data that are usually incorrect , and consequently the inferences that are made about RTs collected in different environments can be faulty .
This project will result in more accurate characterization of RT data and therefore improved decision making about human capabilities and disease .
This award is to analyze sediments from Lake Bosumtwi to generate a record of tropical West African hydrologic variability back to 3000 years with decadal resolution .
In addition , the first tropical record of atmospheric radiocarbon change between 10,000 and 25,000 years will be produced.Previous field work has secured laminated core material back to about 25,000 years at Lake Bosumtwi .
A variety of proxy indicators of climate will be analyzed from these sediments to produce a paleohydrologic time series .
Charcoal from terrestrial plants will be dated from the varved layers to generate a D14C calibration curve for radiometric dating .
The timing of droughts and the natural variability of droughts to this region ( West Africa ) are important .
Better understanding of how the hydrologic history of the region relates to similar records from other regions will advance our overall knowledge of the climate system and allow us to answer many questions regarding interrelationships between low and high latitude and marine and terrestrial climate interactions .
The true shape of the atmospheric radiocarbon variation during glacial to deglacial times will be an important advancement for radiocarbon dating .
This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I Program will demonstrate the feasibility of model-guided approach for developing spin dependent tunnel junctions in magnetoelectronic devices .
Spin dependent tunnel junctions are at the forefront of nanotechnology that is under intensive research and development worldwide .
Spin dependent tunnel devices are expected to be commercialized in about two years in sensor , isolator , and memory .
Due to the unique requirements of the tunnel barrier with a nominal thickness of ~1nm and its interfaces with two ferromagnetic layers , an experimental approach by itself is inefficient in developing new junctions .
There is a critical need for guidance from a realistic modeling in the fabrication processing , and this project is specifically designed to fulfill this need .
Realistic atomistic modeling will be established and experiments will be judicially chosen to demonstrate the feasibility of this integrated approach .
Magneto-random access memories are used in reprogrammable logic , read heads , generic magnetic field sensors , and galvanic isolators and are important components for the electronic storage industry .
They have the potential to be applied in other microelectronic devices where thin layers and interfaces are critical .
This project will investigate the processes controlling mercury ( Hg ) fluxes between the atmosphere and soils and vegetation .
Plant exposure chambers will be used to develop data for modeling the role of forest stand interactions with atmospheric Hg in the biogeochemical cycle of Hg .
Mesocosm studies will be used to study soil flux on multiple scales .
This effort is important for understanding the role of plants in the biogeochemical exchange of Hg between the atmosphere and terrestrial systems .
Juries have the implicit power to acquit defendants despite evidence and judicial instructions to the contrary .
The jury 's right to decide a criminal case by its own lights without fear of outside coercion and pressure has been a hallmark of Anglo-American jurisprudence .
To some observers of criminal cases where juries nullified the evidence or instructions , jury acquittals in the face of ostensibly strong prosecution cases were tantamount to racially-based jury nullification .
Others suggest that it is both possible and perhaps even probable that such acquittals were really not jury nullifications of the law , but simply instances of the prosecution failing to meet its burden of proof .
This research tests a model of jury nullification and involves four experiments that examine the influence of judicial instructions and various fact and legal situations that may provoke juries to nullify .
The mock jury experiments , as guided by the model , involve 1316 juror-participants using videotaped trials presented in a realistic setting .
The first experiment is an exploration of the effects of jurors ' emotional biases in reaching a nullification verdict .
Jurors will view a trial that has elicited nullification verdicts or a trial that has not .
Jurors will either be given standard ( pattern ) or nullification instructions by the trial judge .
Emotional biases will be primed by varying the attributes of the victim who will be presented either in a neutral light or will be very unsympathetic .
A second battery of experiments will delineate three nullification-relevant legal situations ( i.e. , unfair laws , unfair application of law to the defendant , and violation of due process ) .
While commentators have argued that these situations tend to evoke the jury 's nullification tendencies , there is no extant empirical evidence that this is so .
The studies also investigate the impact of providing juries with nullification instructions as compared to standard ( pattern ) judicial instructions .
The researchers examine the impact of these instructions on both the verdicts and dynamics of jury deliberations within the context of the three categories of nullification .
The third proposed experiment explores the impact on a nullification decision of a juror who argues that the jury should focus on a just outcome rather than solely on an outcome that complies with the law ( a trigger ) .
The researchers experimentally manipulate the presence or absence of a trigger in two trials and analyze the effects on the jury 's deliberations and verdicts .
The research proposed will provide empirical evidence as to when , why , and how juries nullify and inform the debate as to whether juries should be informed of their power .
The existing urban politics literature has classified development policies into three types location incentives that subsidize development ; progressive development policies that provide incentives but with strings attached ; and growth management restrictions .
Unlike most of this extant work which has examined one or at most two of the policy types in isolation , the researchers treat growth policy as a continuum across these types , based on the distribution of the costs and benefits of development among pubic and private actors .
The specific deals that cities negotiated with private actors can fall at any point on this continuum , based on the combination of policy instruments used , the concessions and extractions negotiated .
Use of the bargaining perspective allows them to unite these separate approaches to city growth issues by focusing on the factors that increase a city 's relative bargaining power -- enabling it to make extract benefits from firms or forcing it to provide concessions to attract growth .
Applying the Nash bargaining model to development deals also can incorporate insights from previous development research within a more rigorous theoretical framework that leads to a very specific empirical specification .
City competition for development is captured by the relative values of the city 's and the firm 's outside options -- the alternatives each would get if the negotiated deal fell through .
City bargaining power will depend on its inherent attractiveness to different businesses , which determines the minimum value it should accept in a deal ; its need to reduce economic or fiscal problems , which determines its time preference , and the risk aversion of the political actors negotiating the deal .
Identifying the sources of the city 's bargaining power will also lead to policy recommendations on how government institutions and general development policies can be structured to improve the city 's ability to pursue both short term and long term development goals .
The investigators also extend this approach to address repeated play of the bargaining game with different firms over time .
This extension permits evaluation of the possibility that cities can develop a reputation as a 'tough ' or 'soft ' agent , equivalent in development policy to slow- or pro-growth areas .
This bargaining approach is investigated through empirical analysis and theoretical modeling .
Predictions of the model are tested with data collected from a national survey of development officials in all incorporated places over 10,000 within 12 selected metropolitan areas .
The survey gathers information on the two most recent negotiated location incentives deals .
This facilitates the measurement of the outcome of the bargaining model-the value of the negotiated agreements .
Information on specific firms is collected from archival sources , and matched to bargaining outcomes in the data set .
Additional information on city political , fiscal and economic characteristics are merged into the final data set .
Fieldwork in the 12 metropolitan areas add details about the negotiation process in practice and data from city records .
In addition , interviews with officials involved in formulating development policy and carrying out development negotiations provides the basis for case analyses of development negotiation.The anticipated products of this research represent significant theoretical and methodological advances in the urban politics field , as well as an applied framework for city officials to improve pursuit of their development goals .
Given that formal modeling approaches to questions in the urban politics and public policy fields have been limited , the work resulting from this research has the potential to be groundbreaking in its extension of new methodological approaches to these fields .
0214870BrantinghamThis is a 36-month AWARE project submitted by Dr. Jeffery Brantingham , Santa Fe Institute with Professor MA Haizhou , Qinghai Institute of Salt Lakes , Xinning , China , to study the Pleistocene hunter-gatherers of the Tibetan Plateau , and to provide an REU training opportunity for six exceptional U.S. undergraduate students .
This is an excellent proposal to understand late Pleistocene human colonization and adaptation to the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau region .
This study nicely integrates archeological , paleo-environmental , and geochronological research strategies to answer questions of broad importance in the study of evolution of behaviorally modern humans .
This project provides excellent opportunities for U.S. undergraduate students to be trained in archeology and to learn to carry out field research in the western part of China .
It also develops paleoclimatic proxy records that can be integrated into regional and global models of climate variability and change .
The NSF and the Chinese Academy of Sciences jointly support this project .
This Small Business Innovation Research ( SBIR ) Phase I project proposes to develop a programmable motionless optical attenuator that over performs commercial electro-mechanical attenuators and state-of-the-art MEMs attenuator .
Made from a revolutionary liquid crystal and polymer composite material , i.e. , polymer stabilized liquid crystal material , the new technology ultimately promises to achieve the following performance specifications , ( a ) over 10,0001 contrast ratio , ( b ) less than 5 ms response time , and ( c ) less than 2dB insertion loss .
In Phase I , the demo device will be constructed to show the technological feasibility .
The Phase II effort is to develop the prototype attenuator that meets all the projected performance specifications followed by a full commercialization in the later phase.The technology , once successfully developed , will be used in liquid crystal display , photonics instrument , telecommunication , and military systems This collaborative project examines the impact of judicial review on distributive choices by legislatures .
More specifically , it examines the ability of a judiciary composed solely of narrowly partisan judges to protect minority interests in the legislative process .
The project is expected to show that , contrary to conventional wisdom , judicial review can still work well to protect minority interests even when judges are narrowly partisan .
The principal investigators ' research strategy begins by assuming a worst-case context for judicial review .
First , the investigators assume that judges seek singularly to advance the narrow interests of the respective group , or faction , to which they belong .
Secondly , the behavior of legislators and judges is considered in the context most likely to invite nakedly partisan outcomes - the purely distributive context of a constant-sum game in which resources allocated to one faction are necessarily taken away from the other factions .
To study the impact of judicial review on distributive outcomes , the principal investigators develop an infinite-horizon game of judicial-legislative interaction in which a legislature distributes a given sum of revenue across legislative factions , subject to judicial review .
The investigators extend the extant model of legislative bargaining by adding a judicial review stage in which a judge , who belongs to one of the factions and seeks only its interests , reviews allocations enacted by the legislature .
With the baseline provided by the extant model , differences in legislative outcomes between the models can be attributed directly to the impact of judicial review on legislative behavior .
The investigators expect that the model will show , even under these worst-case conditions , that judicial review still works in two important ways .
First , they expect to show that distributive legislation is more equitably distributed in a system with judicial review than without it , even when judges are narrowly partisan .
Secondly , they expect to show in the remaining cases - when the legislative allocation excludes some minority groups from receiving a share - that judicial review reduces the amount of the inequitable legislation that is actually implemented .
The expected significance of the proposed project is threefold .
First , the results of the project will have implications for the on-going international interest in constitutional design , specifically regarding the inclusion of judicial review in constitutional systems .
Secondly , the project will have implications for evaluating judicial selection procedures in American states .
Finally , the model is expected to generate hypotheses capable of being empirically tested in subsequent work .
This research focuses on how functionally illiterate consumers make decisions and cope in the information age .
Estimates suggest a high rate of functional illiteracy , about a fifth of the US population or higher .
Estimates of functional illiteracy in most other countries , particularly developing countries , are much higher .
Surprisingly , very little research has been done examining functionally illiterate consumers in the global marketplace .
The first phase of the study will provide an in-depth view of functionally illiterate consumers .
The functionally literate poor will be studied , along with non-native speakers with very limited experience with English and the US marketplace , as well as functionally illiterate consumers in India .
Issues of interest include ( i ) use of health-related information and consumption of unhealthy products ; ( ii ) use of credit and money management ; ( iii ) responses to advertising , selling and promotional appeals ; ( iv ) use of product-related instructions ; and ( v ) the use of computer-related media including the internet .
Results from the first phase of the research program will serve as the basis for the second phase in which a large-scale survey will be developed and administered .
The second phase will be designed to identify and assess possible solutions to help functionally illiterate consumers negotiate the marketing environment .
The proposed research has important practical implications for adult education , business and government .
This project explores the economics of the term structure of interest rates , and how it relates to monetary policy .
The questions addressed include Can the Federal Reserve affect long-term interest rates ?
Why does Fed tightening not lower long-term interest rates ?
Does the Fed respond to interest rates , or do interest rates simply forecast Fed moves ?
How are Fed actions related to changes in interest rate risk premia ?
What are the macroeconomic risks that drive risk premia in the term structure ?
Are risks in the term structure primarily real or inflation ?
Has this changed over time ?
In their previous work , the investigators document even stronger predictability of bond expected excess returns than previously thought .
They show strong , recession-related time-variation in bond risk premia .
The investigators examine which kinds of interest rate shocks explain this fact , and find that covariance with a level shock to interest rates drives the risk premium .
Inflation shocks and shocks to expected returns fail .
The level shock can be interpreted as a monetary policy shock .
The investigators also look at very high frequency data to isolate Fed policy shocks and find surprising output and price responses , and a surprisingly strong ability of the Fed to influence long-term interest rates .
This work is extended in a number of ways .
Short-term bonds as well as long-term bonds are included .
The investigators have developed an underlying exactly identified affine term structure model , incidentally resolving the long standing puzzle whether such models exist that can capture term premia .
This model is used to investigate a variety of reduced state variable representations .
It is clear that bond data have measurement error , so the investigators develop a model that takes measurement error seriously .
Over the longer term , the investigators plan to incorporate macroeconomic variables into the analysis and tie what they are learning about Fed policy from the high frequency identification to these term structure results .
This project develops a world-level , longitudinal measure of global organizations and discourse devoted to human rights .
Time series analyses of the expected growth in this measure focus on international conflicts and the rise of international organizations as principal causes .
Another series of analyses would focus on the consequences of the rise of this global human rights regime for the policies and for the actual practices of individual nations .
While national-level factors such as economic development also affect national human rights policies and practices , the growth of the global human rights regime and a nation 's connections with the global system are also major explanations for nation-level changes in human rights .
Modern economies exhibit a broad diversity of organizational forms from small owner-operated firms to employee-owned partnerships , cooperatives , non-profits , and finally investor-owned corporations .
A fundamental problem in economics is to understand the forces that lead to these different forms of organization and thus determine the structure of productive enterprise in the economy .
This project proposes an economic framework for studying the economics of partnerships and their role in the professional services .
The approach highlights three ingredients that favor the formation of partnerships ( 1 ) the importance of human capital in production ; ( 2 ) a lack of information on the part of clients that leads them potentially to be concerned about the quality of the service they will obtain ; and ( 3 ) the differing incentives of partnerships and corporations in the hiring and selection of senior employees .
The theoretical model developed will explain why partnerships are typical in the professional services , where human capital is primary input to production and the nature of the service provided may be quite difficult for consumers to accurately assess , but rarely observed in manufacturing , technology , or lower-skill service industries.Associated with this project is a rich set of broad impact policy questions concerning which forms of organization the law and regulatory policy should accommodate .
One of the most striking empirical regularities in this area is that throughout manufacturing , technology , and many service industries , the great majority of enterprises are either small owner-operated firms or larger investor-owned corporations .
However , in the professional services -- law , medicine , consulting , accounting , architecture , advertising-the traditional form of organization has been the professional partnership .
There is no single coherent framework for understanding the differences between partnerships and corporations , or for understanding the specific economics of professional services that have led to this particular form of organization .
This project will offer a starting point for a broader investigation of market structure in the professional services , for examining legal and regulatory issues in these industries , and for interpreting empirical evidence about the structure of professional organizations .
This Small Business Innovation Research Phase 1 Project is to investigate the technical feasibility for harvesting natural carotenoids from the marine algae , Dunaliella salina .
Due to the high capital and operating costs associated with existing technologies , the current price of natural beta-carotene is about twice that of the synthetic variety .
By enabling the commercial production of natural beta-carotene at a costcloser to that of the synthetic product , this research is expected to lead to a significant growth of the natural beta-carotene market .
The specific objective of the Phase I research is to determine the feasibility of a low-cost method to harvest the above mentioned marine algae from the growth medium and to extract the beta-carotene from this algae .
The technology to be developed in this project could also be used to harvest and to purify other carotenoids from the algae .
The commercial application of this project will be in the beta-carotene market .
Beta-carotene is currently used for a wide range of applications as a nutritional supplement , as an agent for food fortification , as an animal feed , and as a food colorant .
This Small Business Innovation Research ( SBIR ) Phase I project proposes to demonstrate the feasibility of utilizing surface plasma resonance phenomena to obtain significant improvements in magneto-optical imaging .
Improved sensors and systems are needed for non-destructive , non-contact testing and evaluation ( NDE ) in many areas , including security , structural , medical , research and industrial manufacturing and quality control applications .
Magnetic detectors and imagers play a major and growing role in these applications .
In Phase I , the research objectives include improvements in spatial and magnetic field resolutions and imaging bandwidth over existing methods .
Magneto-optical materials quality and sensor design will be improved .
Prototype sensors measuring 1cm2 will be fabricated by combining surface plasma structures with materials exhibiting high Verdet constants .
The compositional , magnetic and optical properties of the starting sensor materials will be measured , and the magnetic imaging capabilities of the prototype sensor structures will be evaluated in terms of magnetic field and spatial resolution .
Imaging tests will be made on electrical current patterns , magnetic inks , magnetostrictive structural composites and magnetic medical cell-tagging particles , among others .
Commercial applications include magnetic character reading , magnetic code reading for security , superconductor research , spin valve and magnetic RAM research and manufacturing , integrated circuit electrical current imaging , structural composite stress imaging using magnetic and magnetostrictive materials , flaw detection in metals , biomedical tagging and identification of cancer and other cells , and research and testing of MEMs actuators and devices .
This collaborative project examines the impact of judicial review on distributive choices by legislatures .
More specifically , it examines the ability of a judiciary composed solely of narrowly partisan judges to protect minority interests in the legislative process .
The project is expected to show that , contrary to conventional wisdom , judicial review can still work well to protect minority interests even when judges are narrowly partisan .
The principal investigators ' research strategy begins by assuming a worst-case context for judicial review .
First , the investigators assume that judges seek singularly to advance the narrow interests of the respective group , or faction , to which they belong .
Secondly , the behavior of legislators and judges is considered in the context most likely to invite nakedly partisan outcomes - the purely distributive context of a constant-sum game in which resources allocated to one faction are necessarily taken away from the other factions .
To study the impact of judicial review on distributive outcomes , the principal investigators develop an infinite-horizon game of judicial-legislative interaction in which a legislature distributes a given sum of revenue across legislative factions , subject to judicial review .
The investigators extend the extant model of legislative bargaining by adding a judicial review stage in which a judge , who belongs to one of the factions and seeks only its interests , reviews allocations enacted by the legislature .
With the baseline provided by the extant model , differences in legislative outcomes between the models can be attributed directly to the impact of judicial review on legislative behavior .
The investigators expect that the model will show , even under these worst-case conditions , that judicial review still works in two important ways .
First , they expect to show that distributive legislation is more equitably distributed in a system with judicial review than without it , even when judges are narrowly partisan .
Secondly , they expect to show in the remaining cases - when the legislative allocation excludes some minority groups from receiving a share - that judicial review reduces the amount of the inequitable legislation that is actually implemented .
The expected significance of the proposed project is threefold .
First , the results of the project will have implications for the on-going international interest in constitutional design , specifically regarding the inclusion of judicial review in constitutional systems .
Secondly , the project will have implications for evaluating judicial selection procedures in American states .
Finally , the model is expected to generate hypotheses capable of being empirically tested in subsequent work .
This study will use multiproxy study of cores from the Soledad Basin off Baja CA to determine if bottom water oxygen changes over the last 10,000 years are caused primarily by productivity changes in surface waters or changes in ventilation of subsurface waters .
Proxies to be measured include planktic foraminifer assemblages , oxygen isotope ratio of Globigerina bulloides and N. pachyderma , sediment Mo abundance , and Mg/Ca in benthic foraminifers .
Chronology will be provided by AMS 14C and 210Pb .
Sample resolution for most proxies will be 100 years .
Mo measurements and sea surface temperature estimates will be done at multidecadal sampling resolution .
0214911KaneThis Small Business Innovation Research Phase I Project proposes to develop an enhanced spectral interferometry method for biological and biomedical applications .
This method will provide rapid , high resolution optical imaging and can be easily coupled with fiber optics for in-vivo applications using endoscopes , catheters and similar devices .
The Phase I Project will demontrate the utility of enhance spectral interferometry for cross-sectional imaging in biological tissues .
In the follow on Phase II Project , a fiberoptic imaging spectral interferometer capable of high speed will be developed.The commercial applications of this project are in the area of biomedical devices and instrumentation .
This technology will be applied to a variety of biomedical research and clinical needs including monitoring of tissue response to drugs or radiation exposure , detection of cancerous and pre-cancerous tissues , and the imaging of venous and arterial structures and ocular pathologies .
The Doctoral Dissertation student produces a computerized database of all roll-call votes cast in the California Assembly since 1849 .
Using a Poole-Rosenthal method of analyzing the ideological composition of the US has greatly increased the understanding of the Congress .
By employing roll data from every Congressional session and assuming that each member 's ideological position is relatively fixed from one session to the next , Poole and Rosenthal are able to locate all members of Congress throughout its history in a common ideological space .
Given this cross-temporally comparable space , they are able to address questions of how , for example , partisan divergence , regional alignment , and the dimensionality of political conflict have changed over time .
While the leverage of this approach clearly extends beyond the US Congress , there are few such applications in the literature .
In this grant , the student brings the power of Poole and Rosenthal 's method to the study of party and ideology within California 's state legislature .
The dissertation will unravel the dynamics of partisanship in the California legislature and , in particular , how these dynamics are affected by electoral institutions , such as rules governing primary elections , which have varied considerably across California 's history .
In this case , the data generated are used to measure the degree of partisan alignment and polarization through California 's history .
Application of these data to other central questions of legislative scholarship such as the effects of term limits , legislative professionalization , or the presence of the ballot initiative come quickly to mind .
The researcher has already completed collection of these data for 1957-1958 , 1967-1968 , 1977-1978 , 1987-1988 , and 1993-2001 sessions.This is a dataset that will be used by other scholars interested in these questions .
This project investigates loss aversion , which is one of the central concepts in the decision making and behavioral economics literatures .
Loss aversion is said to occur when a loss of a given magnitude has more influence on choices than does a gain of the same magnitude ( for example , most people will refuse a gamble with equal chances to gain or lose $ 100 ) .
Numerous studies have shown that loss aversion plays a key role in important real-world phenomena , such as the endowment effect , the status quo bias , the equity-premium puzzle in financial economics , the tendency to hold on to 'losing ' stocks while selling 'winners ' , the discrepancy between valuations of public ( especially environmental ) goods by willingness-to-pay for them or by the compensation demanded to give them up , legal principles of compensation for damage , failures of negotiations , and many others .
This project investigates whether a positive-negative asymmetry analogous to loss aversion occurs in the experience of decision outcomes ( i.e. , is loss aversion a mistake ? ) .
Preliminary evidence reported in the project description suggests that experiences of decision outcomes do not always show the good-bad asymmetry that would be expected from loss aversion .
If loss aversion turns out to be a mistake , this work would require a major rethinking of the nature of loss aversion , a concept that is currently taught to almost every business student in the United States , and which plays an important role in many other social science curricula , including economics , public policy , law , and psychology .
In addition , the possibility that loss aversion in choices could in some cases be a mistake , in the sense that it does not reflect an asymmetry in experience , would require a wide-ranging reanalysis of the many practical decisions where loss aversion has been found to play a significant role .
ABSTRACTPrincipal investigator Schkade , DavidInstitution University of Texas at AustinProposal ID 0213481Proposal Title Collaborative Research Understanding loss aversionThis project investigates loss aversion , which is one of the central concepts in the decision making and behavioral economics literatures .
Loss aversion is said to occur when a loss of a given magnitude has more influence on choices than does a gain of the same magnitude ( for example , most people will refuse a gamble with equal chances to gain or lose $ 100 ) .
Numerous studies have shown that loss aversion plays a key role in important real-world phenomena , such as the endowment effect , the status quo bias , the equity-premium puzzle in financial economics , the tendency to hold on to 'losing ' stocks while selling 'winners ' , the discrepancy between valuations of public ( especially environmental ) goods by willingness-to-pay for them or by the compensation demanded to give them up , legal principles of compensation for damage , failures of negotiations , and many others .
This project investigates whether a positive-negative asymmetry analogous to loss aversion occurs in the experience of decision outcomes ( i.e. , is loss aversion a mistake ? ) .
Preliminary evidence reported in the project description suggests that experiences of decision outcomes do not always show the good-bad asymmetry that would be expected from loss aversion .
If loss aversion turns out to be a mistake , this work would require a major rethinking of the nature of loss aversion , a concept that is currently taught to almost every business student in the United States , and which plays an important role in many other social science curricula , including economics , public policy , law , and psychology .
In addition , the possibility that loss aversion in choices could in some cases be a mistake , in the sense that it does not reflect an asymmetry in experience , would require a wide-ranging reanalysis of the many practical decisions where loss aversion has been found to play a significant role .
Auctions are widely used mechanisms for the allocation of resources , and resale after auctions is a practical possibility .
However , this possibility is usually not considered in auction theory .
This project is to re-examine auction theory when resale among bidders is possible .
The project is based on two preliminary results obtained by the investigator ( a ) with the possibility of resale , the optimal auction in the literature may fail to be optimal ; ( b ) the investigator has designed a new mechanism that achieves optimality despite resale .
The project consists of three parts .
First , develop a general method to characterize incentive-feasible mechanisms when resale is possible .
Second , analyze the impact of resale on multiple-object auctions , with the FCC radio frequencies spectrum auctions constituting the motivating example .
Third , examine the relationship between the formation of middlemen and the pricing scheme in multiunit auctions , with the Treasury-bill auctions constituting the motivating example.The project will help to provide a better understanding about auctions , especially on their relation with resale and other re-contracting activities .
Such better understanding has the potential of providing policy implications for major privatization auctions .
Theoretically , the project will help to extend the framework of mechanism design beyond static isolated environments .
Such extension will make the framework more applicable to industrial organization , market design , and political economy .
More broadly speaking , auction theory has produced explicit predictions on how commodities change hands and hence the theory is a building block for a future precise science of markets .
Extending the theory to the more realistic resale settings , this project will enhance the knowledge of how competitive markets actually operate .
Data mining is the process of automatically extracting useful information hidden in largedata sets .
This emerging discipline is becoming increasingly important as advances indata collection have lead to the explosive growth in the amount of available data .
Thisproject aims to develop a wide-range of novel data mining algorithms suitable for thecharacteristics of scientific data sets arising in genomics and fluid dynamics .
Our research will focus on developing algorithms both for sequential datasets and fordatasets that can be represented by directed labeled graphs .
The graph-based modelingenables us to capture in a single and unified framework many of the spatial , topological , geometric , and other types of relational characteristics present in scientific datasets.The specific research tasks that we plan to address are ( i ) Development of scalablealgorithms for finding frequently occurring patterns in graph data sets and algorithms forfinding patterns whose frequency decreases as a function of the pattern-length .
( ii ) Development of scalable and high quality clustering algorithms for sequence and graphdata sets which operate directly in the native feature space .
( iii ) Development of scalableand accurate classification algorithms based on automated sequential or relational featureextraction approaches .
These algorithms will be validated by analyzing data sets arisingin genomic and turbulent fluid flow .
The project integrates the data mining research with an educational plan that focuses on initiating undergraduate and graduate students to the various computational and data analysis aspects of genomic research and developing a comprehensive bioinformatics curriculum whose goal is to foster multi-disciplinary research and collaboration .
In addition , a comprehensive set of software tools will be developed and made available that can be used both to train students in using data mining techniques and to conduct novel research expanding the levels of understanding in various scientific disciplines .
EIA-0238061 Pamela A. Abshire University of Maryland College-Park CAREER Physical Information Efficiency for Sensing , Communicating , and ComputingIn physical computational efficiency , there is no free lunch .
Tradeoffs of performance versus resources are everywhere , placing limits on performance and efficiency .
To streamline technological processes , we may study and even mimic biology 's highly efficient integrated systems that get the most bang for their resource bucks - the ultimate small smart systems that will revolutionize application design microelectronics , bioengineering , nanoscience and other fields .
This line of intellectual inquiry opens up vistas to engage the minds of scientist and lay people alike .
Consider a miniaturize autonomous cell clinic able to navigate your bloodstream and deliver therapy directly to damaged cells .
Or environmental micro bots for security , monitoring and situation awareness .
All are possible once we pinpoint ways to boost communication and computation to use resources in the most efficient ways .
This research is laying critical groundwork for comparative analysis and application across biological and technological systems .
Lunch may never be free-but it can become much cheaper and more nutritious .
Not Available This award by the Inorganic , Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program supports research by Prof. Craig A. Grapperhaus at the University of Louisville to evaluate the potential roles of sulfur site oxygenation in the enzyme nitrile hydratase .
This enzyme catalyzes the hydration of nitriles to amides by using iron in a non-redox role .
A series of complexes that ( 1 ) serve as an effective structural and electronic mimic of the active site , ( 2 ) contain two thiolate sulfurs cis to the substrate binding site that are reactive with oxygen , and ( 3 ) are easily modified with respect to the exogenous , sixth ligand and incorporation of second-coordination sphere functionalities on the ligand framework will be developed .
If successful , this study will not only further the understanding of nitrile hydratase leading to the design of functional mimics , but will also serve the fundamental goal of developing and understanding sulfur-site reactivity and its ramifications on the properties and reactivity of a coordinated metal .
The educational goals are focused on increasing undergraduate research participation as a means to increase student retention , graduation rates , and interest in graduate school in this traditionally under-performing region .
This approach focuses on four key components a formal Undergraduate Research Mentor Program to address local concerns , a regional , annual undergraduate research symposium , the involvement of undergraduate students in the proposed research and outreach to regional undergraduate institutions through site visits each semester .
This research focuses on the design of metal complexes to understand sulfur-site reactivity in an important enzyme .
This will aid the development of functional models for the industrially and environmentally important conversion of nitriles to amides .
The project will also increase the participation of undergraduates in research as a way to increase student interest in science .
This CAREER project would follow the teacher preparation efforts of five community colleges in Mississippi .
The investigator will examine the policy of institutions , the classroom and teacher educator , and the learner 's development from student to teacher .
The intent is to develop better knowledge of how teachers develop mathematics ability and understanding by conducting a longitudinal study of a cohort of pre-service teachers through various programs .
The study is intended to explicate what mathematics educations think is important for students , how students are learning mathematics content and pedagogy , and what ways to faculty develop across institutions as they collaborate in defining goals , course content , and classroom practice .
The study will monitor 375 student teachers through their early courses in 4 community colleges and the University of Southern Mississippi .
The career goals of the young investigator are three To make a significant local contribution to mathematics education in the State of Mississippi and guide her own practice and pursuit of inspiring future teachers to critically analyze the way they think about mathematics .
To conduct research studies which contribute to national conversation about teacher preparation and the importance of mathematics reasoning .
The researcher expects to help define and describe what teacher preparation should look like .
Finally , the researcher intends to contribute to a state that is poor in wealth and human resources to help improve the system of mathematics education .
Her publications address both the practice of preparing teachers in classrooms and the policies of institutions that provide that guidance .
The primary goal of this Faculty Early Career Development ( CAREER ) Program research project is to develop state-of-the-art fast solution methodologies that generate high quality solutions for complex problems in designing and managing logistics and communications networks .
Real-world communications and logistics problems are large-scale , time sensitive , and coupled with side constraints that further contribute to the hardness of underlying mathematical structures .
The specific tasks that will be undertaken for achieving the goal of this project include understanding the applications in detail , analyzing the underlying mathematical structures , and evaluating the various solution approaches through computational testing .
A logistics network rarely functions as planned due to external factors such as unscheduled delays or dynamically changing customer demand .
The main thrust of the proposal is a study on techniques for augmenting a given solution in order to incorporate a disruption to a large-scale system .
In the literature , these types of problems are usually solved by extracting a subset of the problem through preprocessing and then re-solving this smaller problem .
This research , proposes to develop techniques that consider a large part of the problem by designing auxiliary networks together with fast augmentation algorithms that find near optimal solutions in almost real-time .
Also , two important network design and routing problems related to ( i ) identifying synergies in a collaborative logistics network , and ( ii ) routing multiple packets on partially disjoint paths over a communications network , will be studied as collaborative research projects .
With the advancement of globalization and new technologies in telecommunications , not only does the importance of solving network problems keep growing but also this task is becoming harder to accomplish efficiently .
For example , global trade has created logistics networks that span several continents , and the possibility of real-time multi-media communications introduced network problems that need to be solved in less than a second .
To face this challenge , it is necessary to employ fast approximation ( heuristic ) algorithms that try to find good solutions rather than identify an optimal one .
This research plan proposes ( i ) to study fast heuristic techniques for generating close to optimal solutions for large-scale and time-sensitive logistics and communications network applications that are implementable in practice and ( ii ) to further the theoretical understanding of problems arising from these applications .
The objective of this proposed research is to develop micro- and nanotechnologies that will enable precise engineering of cellular environments and allow correlation of subcellular signaling with cellular function .
Genomics has greatly advanced our knowledge concerning how biological systems are programmed .
This software , however , is embedded in the hardware of a cell , which interacts with its environment to compute its specific outputs such as growth , differentiation , or death .
The micro- and nanotechnology developed in this project will enable control over configuration of the cellular hardware such as receptor clustering and cell shape .
The technology will then be used to study how different hardware configurations affect subcellular signaling and cell function .
Specifically , multiple laminar flow technology will be used to stimulate subcellular microdomains with growth factors and soft lithographic three-dimensional protein nanopatterning technology will be developed to perform nanoscale extracellular matrix engineering .
The two technologies will provide , with subcellular resolution , control of cross-talk between growth factor signals and adhesive signals .
This type of knowledge is specifically relevant to understanding physiological processes such as embryonic development and wound healing as well as pathological states such as fibrosis and cancer .
The research will be tightly coupled with the education and training of a work force that can translate these scientific and engineering discoveries into tangible social and economic improvements .
A major component of the educational program is a Biological Micro- and Nanotechnology course that will seamlessly integrate micro- and nanotechnology with cell biology and provide both theoretical training and hands-on laboratory experiences to students .
This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project addresses the challenge of seamless interoperability among computer systems and user interface components such as displays and keyboards .
Such components today are tightly coupled with the computer , which restricts the utility of both especially in mobile systems , where users invariably have to choose between usable displays and reasonable portability .
The system being separates I/O devices from computing devices enabling a different mode of use of computers where a user can carry around much smaller computing devices and use shared larger I/O devices as available..
The design and implementation of these enhancements will be guided by feedback from users of prototypes deployed in the field .
In the long run , the widespread adoption of this approach has the potential to revolutionize the way humans interact with computers , by allowing computing devices to shrink out of sight , while freeing interfaces from the constraints of portability .
The technology has immediate commercial applications in health care and mobile computing as well , these markets will be explored through future strategic partnerships .
This award by the Inorganic , Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program supports research by Dr. T. Brent Gunnoe of North Carolina State University to exploit low valent ruthenium and copper amido complexes to break and form bonds in transformations involving C-H and C-N bonds .
For example , biaryl moieties are prevalent in an array of important compounds including natural products ( e.g. , terpenes , lignanes , flavonoids , coumarins , tannins and various alkaloids ) as well as compounds for nonlinear optics , helical polymers , liquid crystals , ligands for asymmetric catalysis and for use in redox reactions .
The leading methods for preparation of biaryl linkages involve cross coupling between aryl halogen and organometallic aryl species ; however , such reactions often suffer from the requirement of multi-step syntheses of aryl halide and aryl organometallic reagents , and , in some cases , the use of organometallic aryl compounds results in the stoichiometric production of toxic byproducts .
The proposed chemistry seeks to study the details of ruthenium and copper-mediated C-C coupling reactions that proceed via cleavage of C-H bonds .
Oxidation of well-defined ruthenium and copper amido complexes promotes such reactions , and both detailed mechanistic studies and possible extension to catalytic sequences will be pursued .
In addition , the synthesis of polymers that contain heteroatomic functionality is of current interest due to the ability to control macroscopic properties .
Ruthenium amido complexes have been used to cleave C-N multiple bonds , and the proposed chemistry will explore these reactions in detail including possible extension to polymerization methodologies .
The teaching plan describes a range of activities in both undergraduate and graduate instruction including revision of the departmental curriculum and upper level courses , working toward increased research opportunities for undergraduates , and integration of a program into the graduate curriculum that ( 1 ) incorporates a graduate student-based outreach program to schools ( grades 6th - 8th ) whose populations are comprised primarily of groups that are underrepresented in the sciences ( 2 ) exposes graduate students to current topics of research ethics and ( 3 ) provides graduate students with a guided teaching experience.The proposed chemistry seeks to exploit the reactivity of metal complexes for the construction of small organic molecules that form the foundation for many useful products .
The teaching plan involves both undergraduate and graduate instruction including revision of the departmental curriculum and upper level courses , increasing research opportunities for undergraduates and outreach to local schools .
The United States is experiencing increasing difficulties with its electricity supply infrastructure .
Distributed generation ( DG ) can play a large role in solving these problems and provide other benefits as well.This proposal details a five-year faculty career development plan in DG technology .
The research plan concentrates on 1 ) development of novel power conversion systems ; and 2 ) development of a comprehensive computer model of a power system with a high connection density of distributed generators.The educational component of the plan includes 1 ) enhancement of an existing photovoltaics course ; 2 ) development of a wind energy course ; 3 ) curriculum-wide use of the systems approach ; 4 ) integration of research-related systems into design projects for undergraduate courses ; and 5 ) development of a mini-course on renewable energy for South Dakota 's Native American citizens.This proposal meets criterion 1 , intellectual merit , because a ) the work involves novel engineering design , and scientific exploration of an uninvestigated area ; b ) the PI is qualified in this area ; c ) the work is of importance to several fields within Electrical Engineering ; d ) the work plan and resource needs are clearly stated and lead to the desired goals ; and e ) the needed resources are available.This proposal meets criterion 2 , broader impact , because it includes a ) development of new educational materials ; b ) the involvement of an underrepresented group , specifically Native Americans ; c ) specific plans for partnerships between investigators , national laboratories , and industry ; d ) a plan to broadly disseminate results ; and e ) significant benefits to society at large .
This five-year research program is designed to advance our understanding of how to effectively engage diverse groups of youth in learning core IT concepts in ways that motivate them to continue learning in their future education .
Basic research and design-oriented research will be conducted in three inter-related phases .
The first phase will focus on expanding what we know about students ' access , interest , and experiences with new technologies-with an emphasis on identifying barriers to equity and revealing learning resources .
Survey and interview work will be carried out with a large and diverse group of students across socio-economic strata in California 's Silicon Valley region to investigate their access to , and interest in , various kinds of learning opportunities .
The research will document how creative learning opportunities are distributed across different communities and their effects on student interests .
It will also contribute to defining different profiles of student fluency and how these are associated with learning ecologies constituted by the interweaving contexts of self , family , peer group , school , and community .
The second phase of the work will focus on co-developing courses with teachers .
A core guiding principle of these courses will be a primary focus on the student as designer and a learning goal will be to help students understand design as a human process in which everyone can be involved .
The course material will build fluency in the context of projects in which students design , program , and implement information systems that address issues of youth interest .
This approach will allow students to be authentic contributors of knowledge and processes while simultaneously building understanding of the core concepts and capabilities outlined in the NRC Fluency report-such as programming , information design , and human-computer interaction .
In the third phase , the teaching and learning processes in these courses will be studied systematically , with a particular focus on collaborative design work .
A key goal of this research is to contribute to theories of collaborative learning .
Productive collaborative design practices will be identified and the ways that such collaborations are often less than productive and can be made more productive will be articulated .
Learning properties of collaborative technology design work beyond cognitive outcomes will be identified for empirical study , including motivational , relational , and meta-communicative outcomes .
Beyond the intensive co-development of courses with local teachers , the educational component of this project will include the creation of a library of video case studies that highlight exemplars of more and less productive small group collaborative interaction .
These will be used to help teachers ( both pre-service and in-service ) and novice researchers see ways of engaging students in learning that support fluency and increase interest and the ability to use and understand technology broadly .
The use of video cases will support conversations about teaching and learning processes as they provide concrete references that can be revisited and reflected on from multiple perspectives .
The video cases will be used to improve existing courses and in dissemination activities directed at the broader community of information technology teachers and researchers .
To develop truly integrated human-robot interactive environments to understand , assist , rehabilitate , and enhance the human neuromuscular systems , a virtual robotic environment that explores human 's full potential needs and abilities will be developed .
As the first step , an inherently safe stationary wearable arm system will be designed and constructed with a neuro-muscular system identification technique to extract the human adaptation parameters in real time .
The intellectual merit of the proposed activity is that , using this virtual robotic environment , fundamental scientific questions relating to human perceptual and neural interactions between the virtual and actual movements will be investigated .
With these intellectual contributions , this environment will immediately lead to rehabilitating patients with motor impairments , even for those who are not strong enough to execute task-level movements on their own , by steering them beyond what they had previously thought they were capable of doing .
The educational goals are to create interdisciplinary educational environment , to increase the number of women in engineering and computer science , and to increase the interaction between motor-impaired students and engineering students .
The proposed research and educational approach will have a significant and broader impact not only in the scientific and educational communities but also the lives of disabled people who are not currently able to independently execute everyday tasks .
This CAREER project combines research and education in the design and use of optical tweezers instruments and in the study of the biophysics of DNA .
Optical tweezers instruments will be used to measure the forces required to extend single DNA molecules beyond their natural contour length in the presence of DNA binding ligands .
Three major systems will be examined to elucidate the mechanism by which ligands that bind preferentially to single-stranded DNA alter the helix-coil transition of double-stranded DNA molecules .
The DNA helix-coil transition at low pH will first be examined .
Since the proton is the simplest charged single-stranded DNA binding ligand , a study of the effect of pH on DNA overstretching will provide a firm basis for understanding more complex ligands .
It has been shown that HIV-1 nucleocapsid protein functions by altering the DNA helix-coil transition .
To determine the entropic or enthalpic nature of this altered cooperativity , this work will examine the temperature dependence of this effect for wild-type and mutant proteins .
Bacteriophage T4 Gene 32 protein ( gp32 ) is a DNA binding protein essential for DNA replication , recombination , and repair .
Measurements of the dependence of DNA helix-destabilization by this protein on temperature , ionic strength , and protein concentration will be used to elucidate the nature of gp32 's interactions with DNA.By studying force-induced melting of single DNA molecules in the presence of DNA binding ligands , single molecule manipulation techniques will be established as a quantitative tool for elucidating the role of DNA binding proteins in biological processes such as retroviral reverse transcription and DNA replication .
This work will have a strong educational impact by training students in an entirely new interdisciplinary area .
Undergraduate and graduate students will be trained in an exciting new field at the interface of physics , chemistry , and biology .
It will also have a strong scientific impact by developing a new technique for studying important biological interactions .
The PI will also lead the development of a new Advanced Physics Lab class that will train advanced undergraduate physics majors at Northeastern University to design and build physics experiments , including the construction of single beam optical tweezers instrument .
This project is supported by the Molecular Biophysics Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Division of Physics in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate .
How do organizations make strategic choices during the time of fundamental and comprehensive institutional transitions such as those sweeping emerging economies ?
This project addresses this question both theoretically and empirically .
It first develops a two-phase model of market-oriented institutional transitions .
It then focuses on the longitudinal process to move from a relationship-based , personalized transaction structure calling for a network-centered strategy to a rule-based , impersonal exchange regime suggesting a market-centered strategy .
The central hypothesis is that as institutional transitions progress , networks and connections , previously thought to be imperative for business success , may become less important .
Instead , competitive resources and capabilities are likely to be more significant determinants of firm performance.Empirically , the project proposes three large-scale , multi-year studies .
Study 1 will collect longitudinal case data from two partner organizations with operations in over a dozen cities in China .
Study 2 will employ a two-wave survey methodology to collect data from approximately 300-450 firms in China , separated by two years between each survey .
Finally , Study 3 will replicate and extend the China studies in two other important emerging economies , Thailand and Russia , using a similar two-wave survey methodology.The project.s dynamic integration of institutional and strategic choice theories and its longitudinal and multinational empirical design promise especially interesting insights .
It synthesizes a diverse but scattered literature on emerging economies to form a coherent contribution .
It explains , predicts , and aims to empirically document the mechanisms through which the importance of networks is gradually eclipsed by the importance of capabilities .
This project thus highlights the relative decline of networks and connections ( albeit still important ) vis-a-vis competitive capabilities during institutional transitions.In terms of its broader impacts , the project advances discovery while promoting teaching , training , and learning .
The primary educational component includes the development of three .Emerging Markets Field Study .
courses , one for MBAs , one for Executive MBAs , and another for undergraduates , that capitalize on the learning from this project .
It also allows me to infuse the excitement of research into general courses/modules in International Business and Strategy at the MBA , undergraduate , and executive levels .
It also enhances infrastructure for international research and education in Asia and Europe .
It facilitates broad dissemination through publications in practitioner-oriented journals and online media as well as briefings to partner organizations and other interdisciplinary outreach activities .
Finally , it fosters connections between discoveries and their benefits to the global society .
Given the rising importance of emerging economies , our research and teaching activities need to move out of our familiar OECD mindset and pay more attention to emerging economies , if we endeavor to remain globally relevant .
This project aims to help steer the research and education agenda toward focusing more needed attention on emerging economies .
P.I .
Chant , Robert ( Rutgers ) Proposal # 0238957Proposal Title COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH Lagrangian studies of the transport , transformation , and biological impact of nutrients and contaminant metals in a buoyant plume Project Summary The PIs propose a coordinated program of field and numerical experiments to examine processes that control the fate and transport of nutrients and chemical contaminants in the Hudson River plume .
Urban estuarine plumes such as this one represent a major pathway for the transport of nutrients and chemical contaminants to the coastal ocean .
The fates and transports of this material are controlled not only by the plume dynamics but also by biological and chemical processes coupled to the dynamics of the plume .
To investigate these processes , the PIs propose to conduct a series of dye experiments along with continuous underway chemical and biological sampling using a towed vehicle .
These experiments will occur within the framework of the LEO-15 Observatory to enable interpretation of the dye study by placing the Lagrangian surveys in context with shelf-wide observations from satellite imagery , surface currents and far-field subsurface hydrography .
LEO-15 will be augmented by a cross shelf array of moored instruments to provide detailed estimates of subtidal circulation , stratification and Reynold stresses .
In addition , data-assimilative numerical simulations will provide high resolution and realistic hindcasts of the coastal ocean during the field experiments .
The modeling will assimilate the dye-tracer data into a 3-D coastal circulation model and guide future efforts to assimilate other tracers into circulation models with complex sources and sinks .
The major aims of this work are to distinguish between physical processes that transport/mix material in a buoyant plume from biological and chemical transformation processes as well as the quantification of biological and chemical interactions in a Lagrangian perspective to provide a means to assess their importance in determining the fate and transport of nutrients and chemical contaminants in a buoyant plume .
The proposed experimental plan will contrast the response of physical , biological , and chemical processes in the Hudson plume during upwelling and downwelling conditions .
A major outcome of this work will be the determination of the extent and biological impact of contaminants in the plume along the New Jersey coast and Middle Atlantic Bight and will improve the ability to predict the fate and transport of contaminants and the rate that they enter the base of the food chain in the coastal ocean .
Jeffrey R. ErringtonSUNY BuffaloConnecting Structural Order to Thermodynamic and Kinetic Properties of Aqueous Solutions A Research and Education Program.A research project dedicated to gaining a fundamental understanding of the relationship betweenthe macroscopic thermodynamic and kinetic properties of aqueous solutions and their underlying microscopic structure is described .
In addition , several initiatives to enhance undergraduate and graduate education in the field of molecular modeling as well as programs to promote science and engineering in the local and global community are presented.The behavior of water and aqueous mixtures plays a key role in biology , chemistry , physics , andthe design of many chemical and biological processes .
In aqueous systems , directional interactions ( hydrogen bonds ) combine with short-range repulsions to determine the relative orientation of neighboring molecules as well as their instantaneous separation .
These seemingly simple underlying interactions result in macroscopic behavior that is complex and poorly understood .
The objective of this investigation is to provide a deeper understanding of the connection between the macroscopic behavior and microscopic interactions in aqueous systems .
A further understanding of this connection will be beneficial from both a scientific and industrial standpoint.Within this proposal , a novel formalism for interrogating the behavior of aqueous systems is introduced .
The new approach addresses two limitations of previous studies .
First , the concept of quantifying structural order is utilized to bring quantitative rigor to the characterization of structural properties .
This route is opposed to the examination of mainly phenomenological indicators of solution structure that has been employed in earlier studies .
Second , a novel technique for calculating thermodynamic properties of solvation , based on transition matrix Monte Carlo concepts , is presented .
The new method addresses many of the deficiencies of existing methods and provides a means for calculating thermodynamic properties that were previously intractable .
The goal of the proposed study is to obtain a more complete understanding of three classes of solutes in water ions , carbohydrates , and amino acids .
Each of the selected systems exhibits unique behavior and presents distinct challenges for investigation .
The proposal calls for the examination of individual solutes as well as mixtures of solutes in aqueous solution .
The three systems selected enjoy both scientific and industrial relevance .
Ionic solutions play a key role in geology and their role in corrosion is important to the auto industry .
Carbohydrates are an important energy source for plants and animals and are used extensively in the development of pharmaceuticals .
Amino acids are the subunits of proteins , and as such are of fundamental importance to metabolic processes as well as to the development of biotechnologies .
On the education front , recognizing that nanotechnologies and other applications where a molecular-level approach is employed are emerging fields for employment of chemical engineers , a proposal for curriculum development , which features courses on molecular modeling at both the undergraduate and graduate level , is presented .
In addition , an outreach program for the PI and a plan for the PI to organize of an outreach program for undergraduate students is described .
The goals of these initiatives are to promote science in the local community , excite students about science and mathematics at a young age , and to improve the retention rate of sophomore and junior undergraduates .
Finally , a plan to develop a web-based microscopic learning center is presented .
The objective of this initiative is to provide the global community with modules that describe scientific phenomena from a microscopic perspective .
From the proposed web site , teachers from all over the world will be able to download material for use in their courses .
The Small Business Innovation Research ( SBIR ) Phase II project is designed to leverage the success in polarized strip development .
It will also advance two configurations for 2D and 3D capable auto stereoscopic display products , and initiate customer evaluation of these products .
Specific objectives of the project include completion of the technical developments necessary to produce 2D/3D products using the proprietary Strip Polarizer Parallax Barrier ( SPPB ) technique for flat panel displays ; collaboration with a target customer to design and develop a market specific product ; initiation of a pilot-manufacturing run to produce prototypes for initial market feedback ; qualification of the initial prototypes in terms of performance , quality , manufacturability and acceptance ; and continuation of research efforts needed to produce full resolution 2D/3D products .
A successful Phase II program will advance the technology to prototype and initiate market feedback in target applications .
Phase II prototypes will embody the majority of the technology needed to produce the full resolution products and will serve to firm up manufacturing processes while establishing initial market demand in those segments where natural upgrades to full resolution will increase market penetration.The direct commercial potential of the projects lies in autostereoscopic products that will be manufactured using the proposed technology .
Such display products will find widespread use in scientific and medical visualization applications , CAD , industrial inspection , and remote vision applications .
Consumer based applications may include electronic commerce and computer gaming .
CSTB will convene an expert committee to conduct a comprehensive assessment of wireless technology and application trends and their implications for spectrum management and policy .
The committee will seek broad input and produce a report with consensus findings and recommendations .
This project will be grounded in technical expertise but examine the interplay among technical , economic , and policy issues .
The committee will deliver a final report 18 months from its first meeting that would provide analysis , conclusions , and recommendations based on input gathered during the study and committee expertise and deliberations .
The final report will be subject to NRC review procedures and would be prepared in sufficient quantity to ensure its distribution to the sponsors and other relevant parties in accordance with NRC policy .
The report will be made available to the public without restriction .
It will be posted on the World Wide Web as well as distributed in printed form .
Briefings to key people in government , industry , academia and the nonprofit sector are anticipated .
The intellectual merit of the project will flow from its examination of an arena for research -- wireless communications -- that is poised for growth .
It will characterize trends and illuminate opportunities for new R & D activity .
Because the project will relate technical possibilities to economic concerns and legal/regulatory options , it will also speak to opportunities for social science research .
The broader impacts of the project will also derive from its interdisciplinary character .
The project will leverage the technical insight of the committee and its analysis to improve the quality of policy analysis in the wireless arena ( spectrum management and related policy ) , which will affect the public.s ability to benefit from wireless innovations and economic competitiveness associated with production and uses of wireless technologies .
Over the past decades , most of the previous graphics and visualization systems are polygon based .
However , with the advent of scientific simulations and advanced biomedical and industrial acquisition devices , more and more objects of unprecedented size are produced with discrete samples as natural representations .
In this proposal , the PI will generalize image resampling theory to describe the fundamental resampling problem of graphics rendering .
Guided by this theory , practical approaches to performing high quality and efficient resampling will be designed and further applied to the rendering of various discrete objects , including 2D image warping , volume rendering , and point-based rendering .
The developed theory will also used to guide the design of new point-based representation , so that discrete primitives as well as polygons can be rendered in a unified rendering system .
The newly designed algorithms will be validated and disseminated through application to mainly two real-world applications that the PI has already been collaborating on .
The volume rendering algorithms will be used to visualize large simulations , in areas such as aerodynamics , astrophysics , and chemical contamination dispersion .
The point-based modeling and rendering algorithms will be used to build point-based models from modern laser range scans and ultimately provide an interactive system for digital architecture design .
This validation and dissemination are achieved by pursuing a vigorous education plan , undertaking a number of complementary initiatives ( 1 ) developing new graduate and undergraduate courses at the University of Minnesota ; ( 2 ) developing educational software for teaching ; and ( 3 ) other activities including organizing workshops and tutorials .
Intellectual Merits The algorithms coherently designed using the resampling theory represent improved rendering techniques for scientific visualization systems by delivering higher quality and better efficiency .
The proposed research is well built upon the PI 's solid knowledge and extensive experience with image and volume resampling and antialiasing , as well as accelerated volume and polygon rendering .
Broader Impacts The proposed career development plan will not only advance the state-of-the-art of scientific visualization and computer graphics , but also make significant contributions to many other research fields which are facilitated by advanced scientific visualization , besides the ones being used for methodology validation and dissemination during the course of this project .
Possibilities in these fields will likely open , stimulating even more applications of the technology than originally conceived .
The work will provide an integrated electronic infrastructure that will act as a catalyst for the transmission of information across many boundaries .
Collaborating partners in this CAREER effort include universities within the US , in Japan and in Africa .
The program seeks to develop a real-time data collection , integration and management system to monitor free-ranging chimpanzees for conservation purposes .
Novel non-invasive techniques will be developed to obtain the physiological status of the chimpanzees .
Data will be captured by mobile handheld modules on PDAs in standardized formats .
The software is linked to a global positioning system .
Modules in the field in Tanzania will be downloaded , stored , and served from a database in Virginia .
The server will be web-enabled , to both disseminate information and be the basis of an education program , which involves students across many levels .
This career grant project offers a novel research approach to attempt to reduce our uncertainty of climate system sensitivity to greenhouse warming by quantifying cloud radiative feedbacks in the historical data record .
The study focuses on the three clouds types believed to have the greatest radiative impact on the climate system Oceanic subtropical low-level ; oceanic summertime storm-track ; and tropical deep convection .
The data set to be utilized as a basis for the research is the cloud catalogue created by Warren and Hahn ( 1999 ) which offers a record beginning in 1952 , pre-dating the satellite record by three decades .
The research activity is expected to enhance scientific understanding of cloud feedback mechanisms and climate sensitivity , contributing towards improvements in understanding and modeling global warming associated with climate change .
The results of this project will be communicated to the general population via public lectures and education of K-12 students and their teachers .
0238917PanitchThis work focuses on the synthesis and characterization of biomimetic , self-assembling hydrogels that are useful for delivery of bioactive compounds .
These hydrogels will be unique in several respects they are physical gels with the consistency of ointment that can be polymerized in situ or spread onto an area ; drug release from the gels is dependant on the affinity of the drug for the gel ; the affinity of the drug for the gel can be tailored ; and the dissolution of the gel can be controlled based on the affinity of the constituents for one another .
It is hypothesized that physical gels formed by combining peptide-modified poly ( ethylene glycol ) star polymers ( PEG stars ) and sulfated polysaccharides can be tailored to control both dissolution of the gel and release of bioactive components .
It is further hypothesized that these gels will release bioactive components on a physiologically-relevant time scale .
To verify these hypotheses , gels will be made with 4-arm and 8-arm PEG stars and heparin , chondroitin sulfate or dextran sulfate .
The gels will be complemented with four distinct polysaccharide-binding peptides , and the release of the peptides will be studied .
Finally , the bioactivity and physiological application of the gel will be tested for the case of vasorelaxation .
The overall goal of the project is to develop a new class of hydrogel release systems .
These release systems can be polymerized in situ , are soft and pliable and can be used in clinical situations where ointment-like materials with controlled release characteristics are necessary .
The first target application is a gel that promotes vasodilation in an in vitro saphenous vein model .
The proposed work lends itself to future work in controlled release from both physical gels and covalent gels ; biologically- based and synthetic molecules can be tailored to release via similar schemes .
In addition , the scaffolds can be used as artificial extracellular matrices , which are capable of sequestering factors , releasing factors and sustaining cell growth and survival .
The educational component consists of curriculum development at ASU as well as outreach to Scottsdale Community College .
A survey course of Molecular , Cellular and Tissue Engineering will be developed .
This class will serve several purposes the opportunity for graduate students to become involved in course development and in teaching , the exposure of community college students to bioengineering and the creation of laboratory opportunities for undergraduate students from Scottsdale Community College .
Intellectual MeritDesign in power-limited scaling era .
This proposal presents a general framework of minimization of power and energy in digital CMOS integrated circuits .
This proposal presents a framework for designing digital circuits to either minimize power/energy dissipation for given performance or maximize the performance under power/energy constraints .
The problem is defined at the circuit level , but is also expanded to include the device , microarchitecture and system levels.This framework will be used in designing signal processing blocks for communications and storage systems .
The particular applications targeted are iterative decoders for turbo and low-density parity check decoding.Broader ImpactsThe broader impacts of this proposed project are twofold 1 ) to widen the education in digital integrated circuits including power , energy , as well as robustness as key determining variables within digital integrated circuit designs and 2 ) to include these areas within the revised edition of a widely used textbook in Digital Integrated Circuit .
My education plans aim at providing a solid analytical background and design intuition for our students in the design of digital circuits and systems .
0238787LivingstonThis proposal details an integrated research and educational plan centered on the development of a tissue engineering and biomaterials program in the department of Biomedical Engineering at New Jersey Institute of Technology .
The research component investigates a systematic approach in evaluating biomaterials as potential scaffolds for cell based therapies and integrating these concepts in new undergraduate and graduate courses in biomaterials and biocompatibility and principles of tissue engineering , respectively .
The goal is to also develop a program that will have an impact on increasing the number of underrepresented groups in the field of engineering and science by introducing concepts to high school students from underrepresented minority groups and training high school teachers of all girl schools interactive approaches to teaching engineering to their students .
The emerging technology of tissue engineering has the potential of becoming the therapy of choice for the regeneration of a number of damaged or diseased tissues and organs .
The approach is to use cells , instead of drugs , to treat various diseases or disorders .
At the forefront of investigation is the use of stem cells because of their ability to differentiate into various cell types and thus , promote the regeneration of the damaged or diseased tissue of interest .
Mesenchymal stem cells ( MSCs ) are multipotential cells that are capable of differentiating along several lineage pathways .
MSCs , which are obtained from adult bone marrow and expanded in culture , are believed to be valuable as a readily available and abundant source of cells in the tissue engineering field .
However , for treating damaged or diseased connective tissues , such as large bone fracture , osteoarthritis , tendon and ligament injuries , and spinal cord injury , MSCs must be combined with an appropriate scaffold material that promotes attachment and differentiation .
For this technology to advance into clinical application , the development of improved scaffold materials is needed .
The goal of this research program is to investigate in a systematic fashion the optimal surface properties and characteristics of materials that promote stem cell differentiation .
The principal investigator and others have demonstrated that MSCs , when combined with bioactive ceramic scaffolds induce bone formation in large , long bone defects .
However , complete repair and return of mechanical function of the long bone is limited due to the brittle nature and/or poor remodeling of the ceramic material .
Other synthetic and natural biomaterials with improved mechanical and degradation properties have been investigated in in vitro experiments as potential scaffolds for the MSCs , but once implanted , MSCs fail to induce bone repair .
Therefore , the objectives of the proposed research are two-fold .
First , this study is designed to gain a clearer understanding of the mechanism by which calcium phosphate ceramics promote MSC differentiation and synthesis of new bone tissue by examining the effect of surface properties ( e.g .
chemistry and topography ) and ion dissolution/reactions in influencing how stem cells adhere , the morphology they assume , and subsequent differentiation .
These fundamental studies will further advance the development of improved materials for stem cell induced bone regeneration .
Second , as an extension of this work , a novel study examining polymeric materials that have well defined surface properties and/or architectures that modulate stem cell morphology will be investigated .
As a function of cell shape , stem cell differentiation into cell phenotypes of bone , cartilage , and adipose tissue will be examined .
Many accidents result from a series of events , an accident chain , with events occurring in just the right , or more aptly , just the wrong way .
The events that precede and lead up to the accident are termed precursors , and they represent a rich source of information to project extreme events , assess risk exposure , and determine appropriate risk mitigation measures.Because precursor events can be used to understand and mitigate future risk exposure , industries have developed analytical techniques and management approaches for detecting , modeling , and acting on precursor signals .
These industry methods have been developed largely in isolation from each other and pollination of methods across industries has been limited .
This study will provide a platform for sharing accident precursor methodologies across industries , and will scope future research directions and challenges in precursor management .
The study , to be conducted by a committee of experts from the risk management and engineering communities , will analyze precursor methodologies in the airline , chemical , health care and nuclear industries , among others .
These industries face the common challenge of mitigating against low-probability , high-impact events , yet are dissimilar enough such that approaches have evolved with limited cross-industry sharing .
The study will include a review of the literature , expert testimony , two workshops , committee deliberations and other fact-finding activities .
The study will culminate in a National Academy of Engineering consensus report that incorporates committee findings and workshop proceedings .
The report will1 .
Present a framework for understanding precursor events in the context accident sequences .
This framework will have cross-industry applicability and be consistent with current industry practices .
2 .
Highlight research findings in modeling precursors and present future research directions and challenges.3 .
Examine the success of mandatory and voluntary reporting systems in capturing precursor data .
The report will present the factors , policies , and methods that can affect the performance of these systems.4 .
Present the successes and challenges of designing warning systems for the automated detection and diagnosis of precursor events .
The report will provide industry practitioners , researchers in risk management and safety science , policy makers , and public-sector agencies with guidance on using precursors for risk mitigation .
It is envisioned that the report will benefit a broad range of industries and disciplines in mitigating against events for which there may be little , if any , direct experience .
This Faculty Early Career Development ( CAREER ) Program award is to develop next-generation functional materials by systemically engineering macroscopic structures comprised of functional nanotubes .
Nanocrystals and nanostructures are often cited as candidate materials that can be engineered to exhibit enhanced or entirely new properties for use in different applications .
Specifically in this project , the individual boron nitride ( BN ) nanotubes that exhibit actuation mechanisms similar to that found in nature ( i.e. , slip-stick fibrillar motion ) will be assembled to create new functional macrostructures .
This novel concept originates from the newly observed piezoelectric ( PZT ) effect in BN nanotubes , which can be utilized to fabricate ceramic piezoelectric fibers with controllable expansion and contraction and astounding electrical and mechanical properties .
Such actuation of nanotube networks is poorly understood at present , yet offers immense payoffs in the future if this property can be harnessed to make lightweight , strong , multifunctional composites .
To achieve such development , this project will target i ) design and development of functional nanotube-based composite fibers made of BN nanotubes , ii ) design and development of macroscopic actuators and sensors comprised of functional nanotube composites , and ultimately iii ) development of analytical models and control experiment in order to be able to manipulate the nanoscopic properties and fabrication parameters to arrive at the desired macroscopic performance .
The hypothesis here is that such systems theory-based approach will facilitate the automation of an iterative design process for the final macrostructure actuator/sensor subsystems and provide modularity and interchangeability between different nanoscopic to macroscopic configurations.This research project offers a promising new type of actuator/sensor configuration that is based on dimensional changes and requires no dopant intercalation , which tremendously increases the actuator stroke and stress generation capabilities way above current technology .
This actuator/sensor configuration has the potential for i ) establishing some of the early foundations for future nano-scale robotics via the utilization of nanotube-based devices , ii ) creating next generation nano-scale pumps and nano-engines via a better understanding of the nanotube actuation mechanism , and ( iii ) utilization in many scientific disciplines such as vibration control , biomedical applications ( drug delivery and tumor removal ) , and power generation applications .
The educational plan of this CAREER project is centered on fostering the interdisciplinary aspects of the proposed research program through involving high-school students , K-12 math , computer science and physics teachers , undergraduate and graduate students .
Specifically , this plan will include new cross-disciplinary graduate course development and implementation on nanotube-based actuators and sensors , retention and mentoring plan for underrepresented minorities and under-privileged students through two award-winning programs at Clemson University ( PEER Program - Programs for Educational Enrichment and Retention and the WISE Program - Women In Science and Engineering ) , outreach program for secondary education through employing inquiry-based cooperative learning program for high-school students and K-12 teachers utilizing two NSF-funded initiatives ( Clemson GK-12 project and the SMTG project of the AOP Hub of the South Carolina State Systematic Initiative ) , and finally development of an academe-industry-government partnership through Michelin Corporation and Solid State Division of the Oak Ridge National Laboratory .
Not Available The purpose of this CAREER proposal is to study how to help science teachers prepare to think effectively and apply principles of educational psychology to classroom experiences .
The author expects it to contribute to understanding of the cognitive processes that support the teacher efforts to solve novel and complex problems in the classroom .
The project also has implications for the design of educational technology that promote student higher level reasoning skills through case studies .
In particular , this project is expected to help show ways of meeting the needs of the New Mexico schools with large populations of Native American and other minorities .
She would develop virtual environments for preparing teachers with case learning so that cognitive skills are learned as concrete procedures in the context of everyday life .
The virtual environments allow a focus on a few issues at a time thus reducing the cognitive load on the teachers .
This study will explore several hypotheses about how case-based methods provide higher order thinking skills that help students solve problems .
The researcher will collect data from teachers on student performance by following three cohorts of students for 3-years each .
The cohorts will be pre-service teachers in year 3 of the project and will be followed into their classrooms as teachers .
One cohort will serve as a control group to the others that will go through the training program developed by the investigator .
Education Plan The investigator 's career plans are directly related to the project outlined in this Career proposal .
The investigator is interested in how people think and learn and how to apply that knowledge to classrooms .
This project is very closely woven into the investigators career plans .
As she noted in an e-mail to L Suter on December 12 , 2002 , this project is a direct reflection of my interest in teaching , which stems from my commitment to research how people think and learn .
The materials will be incorporated into the undergraduate curriculum that she teaches and she plans to offer special graduate classes based on the result of her research .
This objective of this career development plan is to introduce the concept of molecular engineering of complicated mesoporous materials in both research and chemical engineering education .
In research , it aims at developing comprehensive methods for designing mesoporous multicomponent V-Mo-M-O ( M= Nb , Te , Sb , etc .
) oxides and elucidating the fundamental relationships between the molecular structure and catalytic function .
Model mesoporous V-Mo-M-O oxides will be synthesized via two novel self-assembly approaches employing molecular and nanocrystalline building blocks in the presence of mesoscale supramolecular surfactant arrays and block copolymers .
Various surface chemical probes will be employed to elucidate the nature , number , structure and specific activity of surface redox , acidic and basic sites present in these model mixed metal oxide catalysts .
The molecular structure-reactivity/selectivity relationships from this research program will be used to assist in the design of improved catalysts and the development of fundamental mechanistic models for alkane ammoxidation over mixed metal oxide catalysts.The education program is aimed at integrating molecular engineering of advanced materials into traditional chemical engineering education and training chemical engineers with a strong background in molecular engineering of chemical and biological systems .
This program includes development of two new courses on molecular engineering for undergraduate and graduate students , implementation of a molecular engineering research program for undergraduates , and outreach to underrepresented groups .
The outreach efforts will be directed towards improving higher education opportunities for minority and women engineers by alerting them to the graduate research opportunities in molecular engineering .
The goal of this research is to expand our knowledge of communication theory , information theory , and signal processing , and to make an immediate impact in practical wireless communication systems and networks .
The research builds upon the general theory and code design strategy for space-time coding .
The mathematical methods , algorithms , and concepts developed in this research is applicable and initiates new activities in many different areas of communications and applied mathematics .
These areas include modem design , equalization , beam-forming , linear algebra , and soon .
Of course , the immediate impacts are in increasing the data rates of wireless communication systems as well as advancing our understanding of the behavior of multiple-input multiple-outputchannels.Currently , there is a fundamental theoretical limit which prohibits us from designing full-rate orthogonal space-time block codes for more than two transmit antennas .
Also , the available codes have not achieved the best performance claimed by information theory , so there exists a gap between what is possible , and the state of codes today .
We seek to eliminate this gap by designing new classes of codes that provide full diversity , high rate , small complexity , high performance and mathematically interesting structures .
This project addresses fundamental materials science issues relevant to potential utilization of organic semiconductors in thin film electronics .
In addition to structural factors , such as defect density and domain boundaries , charge carrier mobility is the primary figure of merit in these ma-terials , and is ultimately determined by the electronic band structure and carrier localization dy-namics .
The central scheme of this proposal is to use femtosecond two-photon photoemission spectroscopy ( 2PPE ) to establish electronic band structure and electron localization dynamics in organic semiconductor crystals , thin films , and at their interfaces with metals , and to probe struc-ture-property relationship in these systems. % % % The project addresses fundamental research issues associated with organic electronic materials having technological relevance .
An important feature of the project is the strong emphasis on education , and the integration of research and education .
This project will support graduate , un-dergraduate , and post-doctoral researchers providing training in an exciting and interdisciplinary field spanning materials science , chemistry , solid-state physics , and laser spectroscopy .
Addi-tionally , the academic and industrial collaborative nature of the project provides special opportu-nities for students .
*** This SBIR Phase II Project will develop software to aid formulation chemists in the replacement of environmentally damaging and toxic solvents such as those listed as hazardous air pollutants ( HAP ) in Section 112 ( b ) ( 1 ) of the Clean Air Act .
Phase I provided successful proof of concept for MCT 's approach to use mixtures of green solvents that are tunable to obtain a wide range of solvent characteristics .
This approach allows for the replacement of a broad spectrum of harmful solvents by using a small number of benign solvents .
The system is flexible , allowing end users to control factors such as the organic functional groups present to fit their application .
MCT will incorporate this method into software to guide non-specialists through the selection of solvents and optimization the mixture .
MCT will collaborate with the research groups of Professors Charles Eckert and Charles Liotta at the Georgia Institute of Technology to develop a predictive model for the solubility of metal-organic compounds in organic solvents .
We will perform quantitative solubility measurements on the systems initially studied in Phase I and use the resulting data to verify and improve the solubility model .
The resulting solubility model will be incorporated in the solvent selection software.The recent trend towards environmentally friendly products has caused an increase in the use of green solvents in product formulations and industrial processes .
Regulations governing the use of solvents classified as Hazardous Air Pollutants ( HAP ) or as Volatile Organic Compounds ( VOC ) are forcing companies to look for alternatives to solvents presently in use .
Therefore , there is an opportunity for the introduction of products that are designed to assist companies that need to reformulate products or processes that use organic solvents .
The niche market for reformulation tools is estimated to fall into the $ 30 million range .
MCT 's goal is to release a software product that meets these needs within 3 years , and to gain the majority of the market share , producing revenues of $ 10 million over a period of 6 years .
MCT will license softwaredeveloped under Phase II to companies that manufacture chemicals and allied products .
Solvent replacement tools can be applied to find alternative solvents almost anywhere solvents are in use , including coatings , pharmaceuticals , printing inks , toiletries , cosmetics , adhesives , household and car care , rubber and polymer manufacturing , industrial cleaning and degreasing , agrochemicals , oil seed and food extraction and dry cleaning .
The goal of this research is to develop robust and effective techniques to model , simulate and interact with soft objects .
The physical modeling of deformable objects is one of the fundamental and crucial components of many graphics and scientific visualization application providing an effective way to display and interact with virtual objects that better represent true physical nature , beyond unrealistic rigid-body approximation .
Soft object modeling has been studied extensively using both discrete models and continuum mechanics-based models .
However , two major issues still pose a significant challenge .
First , the conflicting demand between computational efficiency and biomechanical realism directs us to take trade-offs or to sacrifice one for the other .
Second , the robust treatment of interaction between soft objects and intuitive control is often overlooked , being represented by a single point of contact or given external forces .
The PI will address issues in the following areas 1 ) domain decomposition method to represent a complex object structure ; 2 ) adaptive refinement and simplification of the model while preserving overall dynamic behavior ; 3 ) robust constraint-based collision and contact analysis between deformable objects ; 4 ) constrained manipulation for intuitive and flexible user interface ; and 5 ) fast cluster computing environment and associated parallel algorithms .
The educational component of this project includes 1 ) development of a new physically-based modeling and simulation curriculum , 2 ) development of a realistic tissue deformation model for a virtual surgery system which will be used for training medical students and surgeons , 3 ) development of functional anatomy online visualization system for K-12 students and the general public , and 4 ) hosting How Things Work workshop and animation contest to foster research experiences for undergraduate and graduate students in their early academic careers .
The overall objective of the proposed research is to establish the foundation of a legged locomotion laboratory that will provide the infrastructure , equipment and support required for graduate and undergraduate students to obtain research experience in the areas of design and control of high-performance robots that utilize legged locomotion .
The proposed research focuses on designing legged locomotion systems for increased agility , although a small amount of controller development is involved .
Here agility is concerned with aperiodic motions which are not fully addressed by the use of gait or other locomotion strategies involving predetermined motion primitives .
The design methodologies center around the development of a performance analysis which describes the dynamic dexterity of legged systems in terms of their ability to use contact with the environment to accelerate their bodies .
In addition to the performance analysis , the expected results include agility performance measures and actuator selection methodologies , as well as a study of the interplay between kinematics and dynamics that results in a high-performance legged locomotion system .
These developments are intended to aid in the production of legged systems which are highly responsive and adaptable to their environment , thereby improving their utility in several diverse application areas of great benefit to society .
These areas include search and rescue , for instance searching for lost hikers in national parks or locating survivors of catastrophic events , as well as planetary exploration and human-service robotics .
The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development ( CAREER ) Program award is to create a next-generation solid freeform fabrication ( SFF ) technique that will enable the construction of a broad variety of heterogeneous multifunctional devices .
The approach will focus on concurrently developing new techniques for patterned powder deposition and laser materials processing that will together enable the layer-by-layer construction of such devices .
Powder deposition techniques will be based on experimental correlations of powder flow through miniature hoppers and on the physics of granular multiphase flow .
Laser processing techniques for sintering or melting patterned powders will be developed on an experimental workstation , aided by numerical models to simulate transport phenomena in heterogeneous powder compositions .
The educational goal is to prepare the next generation of mechanical engineers with knowledge of SFF , computational design synthesis , and internet-enabled electronic collaboration methods .
SFF and electronic collaboration methods will be introduced into a core undergraduate course .
A new graduate course on SFF including a future international design competition and special focus journal issue will be developed .
Finally , a multidisciplinary seminar series on multifunctional materials design and synthesis will be introduced.If successful , the primary impact of this research will be a next-generation heterogeneous SFF method .
A consequential impact is the ability to fabricate novel , multifunctional devices that will have great potential social , commercial , and military value , notably bioimplants for surgical reconstruction , engineered tissue scaffolds and drug delivery , and devices for energy storage , production or conversion .
Complementary long-term scientific and technical impacts will include 1 ) novel scientific approaches to synthesizing structures with tailored material compositions and properties from the macro- to nano-scale ; and 2 ) integration of digital design and digital fabrication , enabling realization of complex designs derived from physics-based computational optimization in materials of choice .
9712831 Lambros Modeling of interphase regions found both in nature ( animal and plant tissue and bone ) and artificially manufactured materials ( composite fiber/matrix region ) has been performed using the concept of Continuously Nonhomogeneous Medium ( CNM ) .
The present project provides measurements for the experimental validation of the CNM concept .
Using full-field optical techniques , stationary crack behavior in specific interphase regions containing CNMs is investigated .
The observed stress distributions and measured stress intensity factors are compared with existing theoretical models .
An analytical investigation to determine the sensitivity of existing models to key nonhomogeneity parameters is also conducted .
Experimental and theoretical investigation of quasi-static crack propagation in CNMs is also performed .
*** This collaborative Microbial Observatory project focuses on one of the largest microbial ecosystems on the planet the ocean surface layer .
Microorganisms in the ocean surface layer play an integral role in carbon transport from the atmosphere to the deep ocean .
This biological carbon pump has global biogeochemical significance .
The Bermuda Atlantic Time series study Site ( BATS ) is a subtropical gyre characterized by winter water column mixing events , spring phytoplankton blooms , and highly stratified summer periods of extreme surface oligotrophy .
BATS has been a testbed for the development of advanced molecular techniques for measuring microbial diversity , and is the site of the longest time-series study of oceanographic variables on the planet .
The overall goal of this project is to understand the cell biology and biogeochemical activity of seven major uncultured bacterioplankton groups -SAR11 , SAR86 , SAR202 and SAR116 , marine actinobacteria , SAR324 , and SAR406 , by applying new technologies that integrate cell culture and environmental genomics , and by enhancing technologies for the long term monitoring of these species .
This program will support the transfer of tested technologies for monitoring microbial diversity from Oregon State University ( Dr. Stephen Giovannoni , Award 9977930 ) to the Bermuda Biological Station for Research ( this award ) , and promote the development of new technologies with the goal of defining bacterioplankton biology .
The foremost objective of this effort will be to grow these microorganisms in culture for the first time by employing novel high-throughput detection and genetic screening approaches that were designed for exploring a large number of medium variables and for detecting positive and negative biological interactions among organisms .
Fundamental questions about the genomics and population genetics of these species are being explored by linking studies of large-insert genomic DNA libraries with chromosomal painting procedures .
This approach is designed to establish cellular linkage groups among genes that play key roles in biogeochemical processes , and to provide new in situ hybridization strategies for detecting and counting cells .
These data will help us understand how elemental cycling and energy flux have been partitioned among species by evolutionary processes .
The work will be conducted in the context of ongoing biogeochemical studies at the BATS site , and will be linked to an annual summer course , Research Experience for Undergraduates program , and active World Wide Web activities supported by the Bermuda Biological Station for Research .
The cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator ( CFTR ) is a unique chloride channel found in epithelial cells throughout the body .
While functionally an ion channel , structurally CFTR belongs to a family of ATPase-dependent transporters known as ABC transporters .
CFTR , however , is the only known member to function primarily as an ion channel .
Because of its unique molecular evolution , the CFTR channel is an interesting and important model for biophysical studies of ion channel structure and function .
The experiments that comprise this project are based on preliminary studies which show that the gating of the channel is altered by the reduction/oxidation ( redox ) state of the protein .
The experiments use a combination of molecular biological and electrophysiological techniques to examine the role of redox-sensitive cysteine residues in modulating channel gating .
The results will be used to identify domain interactions within the protein that are important for channel function .
The major hypotheses to be tested are ( 1 ) that gating of the channel is influenced by the redox state of specific cysteine residues which if mutated change channel properties , ( 2 ) that reintroducing cysteines into strategic areas of mutated proteins will restore normal activity and will help identify regions of the protein important for channel function , and ( 3 ) that nitric oxide , when produced by cells , acts as an endogenous redox regulator of the CFTR channel .
The research will involve the direct participation of undergraduates , and thus will enhance both the research and educational environment of the Biology Department at Morehouse College 9820147 Kavi , KrishnaCohen , WilliamU of Alabama , HuntsvilleREU Performance Measurement and Evaluation of Multithreaded SystemsThis Research Experiences for Undergraduates ( REU ) Site project supports seven students per year in programs carried out during the summers for three years .
The students work on projects involving multithreaded systems including work in performance measurement and evaluation , tuning of multithreaded systems and clusters of shared memory multiprocessors .
Students for the program are recruited nationwide , but the program focuses on students from institutions lacking research facilities in the Southeastern United States including several institutions with significant populations of underrepresented students.Each REU participant is paired with one of the PIs or a post-doctoral research associate , and a graduate student working on the same project .
Educational activities include an organized 3-semester hour course on multithreading .
During their participation , the students are involved in literature search , writing critical reviews of technical papers , technical writing and oral presentations of their research .
9714946 Shield Samarium-iron compounds with interstitial nitrogen ( Sm-Fe-N ) comprise a promising class of magnetic materials with properties competitive to those of Nd-Fe-B permanent magnets .
This project seeks to accomplish two interrelated objectives ( 1 ) to control the microstructure evolution in Sm-Fe-N-based permanent magnets through processing and alloy development ; ( 2 ) to establish relationships between the microstructure and magnetic properties in Sm-Fe-N-based permanent magnets .
Of primary concern is the influence of grain boundaries , second phases , and grain size on the magnetic properties .
To control microstructure evolution , alloys are designed that effectively enhance the formation of the samarium-iron compound during rapid solidification processing .
Alloying additions , such as Ti , Zr , Si , V , C , and combinations of these , are used to alter the solidification behavior of Sm-Fe alloys .
The goal is to either enhance the formation of the Sm-Fe compound at lower solidification rates or to suppress the formation of crystalline phases altogether .
In the latter case the resultant amorphous materials are crystallized to the Sm-Fe compound .
Subsequent nitrogenation results in the hard magnetic Sm-Fe-N phase .
The relationships between the microstructure and magnetic properties of Sm-Fe-N-based permanent magnets should be clarified in this project .
% % % The most notable advantage of Sm-Fe-N materials over Nd-Fe-B magnets is the Curie temperature ( approximately 150 degrees C higher ) allowing applications in more demanding thermal environments .
However , Sm-Fe-N magnets pose many challenges , especially with regards to intelligent processing and understanding of the microstructure-property relationships .
*** 9733030 Brenner This work is supported by a National Science Foundation Faculty Early Career Development Award .
The research component will focus on an array of problems applying techniques of nonlinear dynamics to fluid dynamics , acoustics , and biophysics .
The uniting theme is the mathematics of nonlinear partial differential equations .
Specific projects include the breaking of fluid drops as an example of singularity formation in partial differential equations ; the dynamical mechanisms behind electrosprays ; a theoretical investigation of single bubble sonoluminescence , the conversion of acoustic energy into light ; and a study of experiments in bacterial chemotaxis , done in collaboration with biologists .
The educational component of this activity aims both to improve the learning environment in applied mathematics at MIT , as well as provide concrete mechanisms for using teaching opportunities to extend the principal investigator 's research program to new areas .
These are several specific points There will be an initiative to involve undergraduate students in the research program by carrying out simple experiments to test theories and extend research directions .
To identify and train undergraduate students for this research , it is proposed to develop a short course during the Independent Activities Period on the application of mathematics to physical experiments .
The undergraduate course in basic fluid dynamics will also be revamped .
For graduate students , several new courses will be developed that describe important mathematical techniques in the context of current research .
Finally , a special student seminar series for informal discussion of topics of current research interest has been established .
The National Science Foundation strongly encourages the early development of academic faculty as both educators and researchers .
The Faculty Early Career Development ( CAREER ) Program is a Foundation-wide program that provides for the support of junior faculty within the context of their overall career development .
It combines in a single program the support of quality research and education in the broadest sense and the full participation of those traditionally underrepresented in science and engineering .
This program enhances and emphasizes the importance the Foundation places on the development of full , balanced academic careers which include both research and education .
AbstractSBR-9907824This project investigates the effects of late career job loss on earnings , wealth and employment , then uses these displacement-induced changes in the relative returns to work and retirement to cast new light on the nature of the retirement decision .
While previous work on job loss outcomes has often ignored older workers and the burgeoning literature on retirement has similarly ignored involuntary job separations , this project will confront a number of important yet unanswered questions in both the literatures on displaced workers and on retirement decision-making .
Proceeding in two stages , the first stage ofthe project involves reduced-form investigations ofthe effects of job loss on older workers ' earnings , employment , and wealth , including pension wealth .
In the second stage , the estimated effects of job loss are incorporated into a structural model of the retirement decision.In the first stage , data from the Health and Retirement Survey ( HRS ) are used to estimate the effects of job loss on earnings , financial wealth , pensions , employment and retirement expectations of workers aged 50 and over .
While there is a large literature on the effects of displacement , much of the recent research has focused solely on prime-age workers .
In addition , virtually no research exists on the effects of displacement on wealth , including pension wealth , or on workers ' expectations regarding future employment and retirement .
These omissions are particularly troubling given the dramatic increase in the incidence of job loss among older workers in recent years .
Preliminary results show substantial damage to wages , financial assets , and future employment as a result of late career job loss.The second stage of the project builds on these reduced-form studies , and examines the effects of displacement-induced changes in earnings and wealth on actual and expected retirement , using the framework of a dynamic retirement model .
Most empirical implementations of retirement models do not allow an explicit role for assets or saving in the retirement decision , nor for liquidity constraints , features that are particularly important for job-losers given preliminary findings that wealth is significantly damaged by job loss and that this substantially affects subsequent transitions into and out of employment .
In this project , the well-known option value retirement model is modified to allow for saving , assets and liquidity constraints , and the model is estimated using HRS data on actual and expected employment.Beyond the fundamental interest in job loss itself , the substantial within-person variation in the future returns to work and retirement generated by the job loss provides a unique opportunity to examine more general issues of retirement .
In addition to the usual cross-sectional data on observed retirement , the longitudinal data on retirement expectations allows for the estimation of fixed-effects versions of the option value model .
Because previous applications of these models have implicitly used differences across individuals in future returns to work and retirement , this project , in identifying this within-person source of variation , offers an important contribution to the empirical literature on retirement decisions .
The increasing volume and evolving types of Internet applications have beendemanding enhanced service from the Internet infrastructure .
A significant amount ofwork is in progress on the networking aspects of the Internet .
To complement theseefforts , the Principal Investigator ( PI ) proposes to explore the issues at the serverlevel .
Specifically , this proposal addresses the support for service differentiation and overload control in Internet servers.Support for service differentiation at the servers is necessary because oftwo primary reasons .
First , evolving applications like e-commerce and continuous mediatransmission will be highly benefited by the differentiated service model .
Second , theadoption ( most likely ) of some form of service differentiation ( at the router level ) in the next-generation Internet will demand the servers to reciprocate in theirservices .
The proposed research in this context will be approached in two steps ( a ) formulation of algorithms for service differentiation , and ( b ) evaluation of theeffectiveness and performance of service differentiating Internet servers.Overloads at the servers are unavoidable because of the bursty andunpredictable nature of the Internet traffic .
Overload causes severe performancedegradation or even crashes the server .
E-commerce businesses incur serious financial lossesbecause of the overloaded servers .
The performance degradation of overloaded serversmay be greatly reduced by incorporating overload control mechanisms at theservers .
The PI proposes to address the design and implementation of overload controlmechanisms at the application level.In general , the performance and functionality of the Internet servers willbe greatly enhanced by the adoption of service differentiation and overload controlmechanisms.The outcome of the proposed research will have a broader impact on theInternet infrastructure and on its users .
Specifically , the proposed techniques willbe complementary to the efforts in the direction of the next-generationInternet , and will be helpful for the e-commerce industry .
They will also facilitate thesupport of continuous media objects in the Internet .
At the local level , theresearch will have a positive educational impact on the students of Michigan StateUniversity .
EIA-0101578Dan C. MarinescuPurdue UniversityCISE NGS Middleware for Internet Workflow ManagementMiddleware is a software layer that allows applications to use the resources provided by a grid .
The middleware is expected to perform functions provided by the operating system of a computer , e.g .
resources management and process management .
In case of a tightly coupled system , resource and process management is under the control of a scheduler , which manages and controls the allocation of all system resources to process competing for them .
The scheduler has accurate information about the System State .
The situation is quite different on a grid where resources are managed by autonomous entities and the scale of the system prevents any single entity from knowing accurately the state of the entire system .
This proposal is concerned with middleware for process or workflow management .
This project from Prof. Luis Echegoyen at the University of Miami is focused on the electrochemical properties of substituted fullerenes , with the promise that electrodeposited thin layers of such materials will exhibit unique and exploitable properties .
The first area of research focuses on compounds that tether a crown ether moiety to the fullerene base .
As cations move into the crown ether , the electrochemical properties of the entire complex are changed .
A second part of the proposed research is the induced isomerization of malonate complexes of the fullerenes , with the promise that this isomerization reaction can be controlled to provide a synthetic route to otherwise inaccessible compounds .
Finally , controlled potential electrolysis of functionalized fullerenes is used to produce free fullerenes that are trapped within a molecular box framework .
Prof. Echegoyen 's research group has an excellent record for the education of professional chemists from underrepresented groups , based on past record , and that tradition is expected to continue.This project takes advantage of some recently discovered chemistry of buckyballs , namely the ability to derivatize them and control their electrochemical reactivity , and the ability to trap species inside of the buckball cavity to accomplish the same goal .
The diversity of chemical groups that link to the buckyball substrate is broad , and so the range of reactive tunability is correspondingly large , allowing surfaces with specific properties to be devised .
Such a skill is useful in creating better electrode materials and better sensors for chemical analysis .
Steroid hormones act throughout the body to regulate development and reproduction by binding to receptors that activate specific genes in cells .
The ovarian steroids , estradiol and progesterone , act in brain to mediate complex behaviors , such as female reproductive behavior in rodents .
Thus , studying the function of estradiol and progesterone in rodent reproductive behavior provides an excellent model to investigate how hormones work in the brain .
Understanding how these ovarian hormones act in brain is essential to understanding their role in various CNS functions .
However , the cellular and molecular mechanisms by which steroid receptors activate genes in brain to control behavior are not well understood .
Recently , a novel class of proteins , known as nuclear receptor coactivators , has been shown to dramatically enhance the ability of steroid receptors to activate genes .
While research has led to a much greater understanding of the molecular mechanisms of these coactivators in steroid receptor action in the test tube , very little is known about how coactivators function in brain to regulate hormone-dependent gene expression and behavior .
This grant will test the hypothesis that the two coactivators , Steroid Receptor Coactivator-1 ( SRC-1 ) and CREB Binding Protein ( CBP ) , are important in progesterone action in brain to regulate reproductive behavior .
We predict that decreasing SRC-1 and CBP expression in specific brain regions will reduce progesterone-dependent reproductive behavior in rats .
These studies will greatly enhance our understanding of how these novel coactivators work with steroid receptors to activate genes in brain .
AbstractRecent advances in software engineering , such as graphical user interfacesand object-oriented programming , have caused applications to become morememory intensive .
These applications tend to allocate dynamic memoryprolifically .
Moreover , automatic dynamic memory reclamation ( garbagecollection , GC ) has become a popular feature in modern programminglanguages such as Java .
As a result , the time consumed by dynamic storagemanagement can be up to one-third of the program execution time .
TheDynamic Memory Management Unit ( DMMU ) , a special-purpose hardwaremechanism based on bitmaps and combinational logic can greatly diminishthis overhead .
The preliminary results show that the hit ratio for 2Kbits and 8 Kbits buffer range from 84-99 % and 95-99 % , respectively .
Thehardware complexity of the proposed scheme is O ( n ) , where n is the size ofthe bit-vector .
For a design with 20K gates and 97 % miss rate , the overallspeedup can be as high as 1.41 .
This proposal calls for the integration ofthis hardware unit into SMP systems , which would allow concurrent garbagecollection in multithreaded-multiprocessors environments .
This can speedup the performance of server applications written in Object-orientedlanguages such as C++ and Java .
Additionally , this proposal also callsfor the study of garbage collection triggering points .
The preliminarystudy indicates that time-based triggering point may yield higher garbagecollection efficiency than the traditional space-based approach .
OPP 9615147 Anandakrishnan Abstract The Antarctic crust and mantle composition and geometry are poorly known .
The primary methods for studying the crust , upper mantle , and the deeper asthenosphere is interpretation of seismic data ; either OactiveO through use of explosives or OpassiveO using natural sources and interpreting various earthquake phase arrival times and amplitudes .
Integrating passive and active seismology can result in efficient use of resources to produce detailed images of the lithosphere .
This award supports development of a passive seismic network for the Antarctic interior .
The Antarctic is a gaping hole in the rapidly improving field of global seismic imaging and tomography .
On this huge continent ( surface area of 14 million square km ) there are only eight broadband seismic observatories .
Further , with the exception of South Pole , all of those stations are along the margins of the continent and none are in the West Antarctic .
By contrast , there are 200 permanent stations worldwide in the FDSN ( Federation of Digital Seismograph Networks ) and on the order of a thousand in national networks not yet integrated into the FDSN .
There have been innumerable temporary deployments ( 1 to 5 years ) through PASSCAL ( Program for Array Seismic Studies of the Continental Lithosphere ) , but which have rarely been attempted in the Antarctic .
The obvious reason for this lack of data from the interior is the need to supply power continuously and store data on-site during the dark winter months .
This project will develop and deploy eleven long term broadband seismic stations on the continent itself .
Because 98 % of the continent is ice covered , these stations will be installed at the surface of the ice sheet .
The body-wave data thus recorded from regional and teleseismic earthquakes can be analyzed at each station for local crustal thickness , lamination , Poisson 's ratio ( a measure of crustal composition ) , crust and mantle anisotropy ( a measure of current and former stress regimes ) , and identification of rift zones and crustal block boundaries .
In addition , the data from all the stations ( including the existing peripheral ones ) can be used for seismic tomographic analysis to detail lateral variations in these properties .
Six of the stations will be installed at existing Automated Geophysical Observatory sites ( in East Antarctica ) which will provide heat and power for the data loggers .
The remaining five stations will be in the West Antarctic and will be powered and heated by wind turbines during the austral winter .
The wind- powered stations are an experimental undertaking that will extend our capabilities for installing seismic stations anywhere in the Antarctic .
The stations on the periphery of the continent ( and other stations in the high southern latitudes -- -most notably the stations of the French GEOSCOPE network ) have been used to measure surface wave dispersion functions for different paths that cross the Antarctic .
These data have been successful in measuring mantle properties , but the resolution ( both horizontal and vertical ) achievable by this technique is limited compared to body-wave analysis .
Nonetheless , this is a valuable existing tool that would be greatly enhanced by the presence of data from within the continent that will be available after successful implementation of the unattended seismometers under this project .
Proposal DMS-9970283Principal Investigator Ilia BinderAbstract The main objective of the proposed research is to understand more deeply the conformal , harmonic , and metric geometry of planar domains .
More specifically , the research will focus on establishing sharp metrical bounds on the rotation of Green lines and elucidating their relationship with the properties of harmonic measure and conformal mappings .
The research should provide a clearer understanding of the connection between the bounds for simply connected and nonsimply connected domains .
Binder will also explore possible applications of these ideas to complex dynamics.Conformal mappings and harmonic measure are classical objects , extensively used for more than a hundred years in different areas of mathematics , as well as in engineering and physics .
By contrast , the theory of systems with chaotic ( or fractal ) behavior is one of the newest and most active areas of mathematics , with a multitude of applications to biology , physics , computer science and engineering .
Binder 's project seeks to employ the techniques and ideas of the modern theory of chaotic systems in order to investigate time-honored questions concerning conformal mappings and harmonic measure , in the hope of shedding new light on these venerable subjects and opening doors to potentially exciting applications in both mathematics and the applied sciences .
0079949WhisnantThis award supports a new research collaboration between C. Steven Whisnant , Department of Physics and Astronomy , University of South Carolina , and Simon Connell , Schonland Research Center for Nuclear Sciences ( SRC ) at the University of the Witwatersrand ( WITS ) , Johannesburg , South Africa .
During the course of the three-year award , the researchers will collaborate on theoretical and experimental nuclear physics research on nucleon and meson interactions using photon beams .
With separate funding , a recent graduate of WITS will work as a postdoc on the project.Professor Whisnant 's experimental photonuclear physics program is conducted at the Laser Electron Gamma Source ( LEGS ) at Brookhaven National Laboratory , and with the Large Acceptance Spectrometer ( CLAS ) at the Continuous Electron Beam Accelerator Facility at the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility ( Jlab ) .
As part of the NA59 collaboration at the European Laboratory for Particle Physics ( CERN ) , the researchers at WITS are pursuing a complementary program studying the internal structure of the nucleon through meson photoproduction at very high photon energies .
The NA59 collaboration has developed techniques for producing and analyzing the degree of polarization of circularly polarized photon beams that can provide valuable direct information on the beam polarization at LEGS and Jlab .
Conversely , the polarized target technology developed for LEGS can significantly enhance the CERN program .
The theoretical input provided by the researchers in South Africa spans both energy regions and will be a valuable aid in data analysis and the design of new experiments .
Alternating shallows and deeps , or riffles and pools , are common features in many alluvial rivers .
Pool-riffle structures affect the dynamics of river meandering , and they provide morphological and hydraulic diversity for stream habitat .
This doctoral dissertation research project will further the understanding of the three-dimensional dynamics of pool-riffle sequences .
The project will focus on different aspects of pool-riffle form and dynamics through a case study in a reach of the Embarras River , a small , low-gradient , gravel-bed agricultural stream in east central Illinois .
Among the activities to be undertaken are the development of a 3-D form index that defines pools and riffles based on parameters the include downstream and cross-stream asymmetry of channel morphology and the total vertical difference between riffle crests and pool troughs .
The project will explore related sequences of upstream riffles and downstream pools and point bars in order to test hypotheses that associate these kinds of pools and riffles as important elements that initiate meandering .
The project also will include direct comparisons of the patterns of fluid motion through a variety of pool-riffle types .
Fluid-flow velocity measurements will be used to estimate patterns of near-bed shear stress measurements and relate these patterns to sediment transport through pool-riffle sequences .
The methods employed in this study will include surveying of channel form , measurements of three-dimensional flow structure and sediment transport , and textural analysis of bed material.Results of the research will yield basic knowledge on the three-dimensional form and dynamics of pools and riffles .
Such knowledge will advance basic theory on stream channel form and dynamics .
It also will be important for the development of design criteria for stream naturalization , a type of stream management that seeks to establish morphologically and hydraulically diverse , dynamically stable stream channels that are capable of supporting healthy , biologically diverse aquatic ecosystems .
As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award , this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research career .
This project deals with the design of highly mobile wireless systems where not only end-users are mobile , but also the base stations that serve these end-users are mobile .
The mobility of base stations introduces several challenging problems in the design and development of such systems .
In this project , highly mobile wireless architectures with capability for intelligent survivability and adaptive connectivity in an unpredictable environments will be researched .
Contributions will be made to the foundation of intelligent highly mobile wireless network and computing systems design , including network architecture , digital information storage , intelligent distributed adaptive reconfiguration , network routing , location management , channel allocation , and information security .
Intelligent agents capable of taking autonomous decisions under uncertainty and approximate knowledge , capable of adapting to changing operating conditions ( low bandwidth , changing topology and connectivity , and node failures and mobility , etc .
) will be researched .
An architecture and a set of relevant protocols will be designed and tested on a simulation testbed .
An extensive performance evaluation and prediction will be conducted to evaluate , predict , and optimize the performance of the developed architectures , protocols , and algorithms .
This project will advance work on ethical issues raised by technological distortions in political television ads .
This project is important to the understanding of how video and computer technology raise ethical concerns in our political system .
Audiovisual manipulations are powerful social phenomena that influence perceptions and information .
This research provides data that can help to understand the implications of accelerating developments in communication technology that can affect political life .
The underpinnings of democracy may be threatened , if information provided by the most pervasive electoral communication format is distorted and misleading .
Earlier phases of the research have documented , through content analysis , that a substantial and growing percentage of ads , particularly negative ads , contain distortions created by video and computer technology .
These may include editing , computer and digital alterations , special effects , sound effects , dramatizations , and other visual manipulations .
Such distortions can mislead voters and interfere with the rational decision making process in the selection of candidates .
Preliminary research , under the previous NSF support , has provided evidence that these distortions may affect voters ' responses to candidates and their opponents .
This project will extend the testing of spot distortions with the following objectives ( 1 ) to test experimentally the effects of technological distortions in political spots on voters ; ( 2 ) to determine in the experimental testing if any identified effects are dependent upon the valence of the spots ( positive , negative ) ; and ( 3 ) to determine in the experimental testing what receiver/voter characteristics ( such as gender and visual literacy level ) may be related to the effects of technological distortions in political spots .
The project will employ experimental testing of distorted versus non-distorted spots .
In addition to traditional measurement techniques , the study will use computer automated dials to assess viewer responses .
To enhance dissemination of information about ethical concerns in technological distortion in political spots , the investigator will produce and distribute project results to academic , public and media audiences .
AbstractCTS-0098132Michael Mackay , Stevens Institute of TechnologyIn a set of preliminary experiments , the PI was able to blend low concentration nanoscale particles in linear chain polymer of the same species .
Remarkably , the rheology of this blended material is altered in such a way that its viscosity and modulus are reduced .
This effect will have potential favorable impact on procession of polymers .
The aim of the present proposal is to determine the mechanism by which the viscosity and the modulus are reduced by a set of planned experiments .
A central problem of advanced computational science is making large datasets and the results of large simulations understandable by scientists andengineers .
The best-known means of imparting this understanding isvisualization , which allows users to see the data .
However , the complexityand nature of some data makes it appropriate to represent using the othersenses .
For example , shape can be determined by touch .
This project studiesmultisensory virtual environments for large -- scale complex scientificcomputing problems .
To better focus the research efforts and validate theresults , it uses multimodal interaction with complex big-molecular datasetsas the driving application .
It aims to devise techniques and tools formeaningful interactions with very large biomolecular data sets in virtualenvironments with visual , aural , and haptic ( force ) feedback .
Mostbiomolecular datasets consist of a few primitives ( such as atom types , ammoacid sidechains , and nucleic acid bases ) that are combined to yield richmosaics of biological complexity .
The researchers believe this is richenough to be representative of other scientific visualizationsub-disciplines and yet specialized enough to offer a well-defined researchtarget.The research includes multimodal feedback using perception-dependentmultiresolution rendering on sequential and parallel architectures .
Theproposed advances optimize the multimodal rendering processes using a setof three characteristics common across most biomolecular datasets - limitedmotif complexity , bounded accuracy , and variable level of perceptibledetail .
Most scientific visualization datasets share at least two of thesecharacteristics and therefore advances here should further the cutting-edgeresearch in other areas of virtual-reality-assisted scientific computing.Here , the researchers will use hierarchical pre-rendered representations ofcommon motifs to allow realism at interactive speeds in multimodalcontexts .
They will also take advantage of processor support for variableresolution integer arithmetic and the limited dynamic range and boundedinput accuracy of biomolecular data to transparently speed up multimodalrendering by trading computational accuracy for speed .
Finally , they willtake advantage of the fact that people 's senses have thresholds of theleast perceptible stimuli , and that they typically perceive high details inonly a limited region , to explore techniques to address variablelevel-of-detail renderings in an integrated and coherent framework acrossmultiple senses .
The researchers will validate the efficacy of proposedapproaches on real-life datasets through a collaboration with two on-campusbiochemistry researchers working on protein folding and rational drugdesign and other visiting scientists and scholars .
This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project describes thedevelopment of a disposable , highly efficient suspension bioreactor for primary hematopoietic ( blood cell-forming ) cell culture .
The unique challenges ( heterogeneous nature , donor variability , and shear-sensitivity ) of these cultures render traditional flask or suspension cultures unable to economically and consistently produce large quantities of cells .
In Phase I , the feasibility and characteristics of a disposable suspension bioreactor was demonstrated .
In Phase II , a scaled-up prototype of a large , agitated disposable bioreactor designed for clinical use ( stem cell transplantation ) will be constructed , characterized , and tested for reliability and durability .
Gas and mass transfer correlations established in Phase I will be verified and extended .
The use of medium optical density as a surrogate measure for cell density will be investigated.The final product will be a system that combines the simple , disposable nature of flask culture with the control and monitoring capabilities of a suspension bioreactor .
The resulting system will enable the cost-effective production of large numbers of primary hematopoietic cells and will improve the effectivenessand decrease the cost of medical procedures in the fields of transplantation , immunotherapy , and gene therapy .
DMS-9970367YuanThis project concentrates on some estimates for linear and nonlinearpartial differential equations and their applications .
It consists ofthree main areas of research activity .
In part one , the objective is to investigate some applications and generalizations of doubling propertyfor parabolic equations .
The emphasis is on the behavior near the boundaryof positive solutions of second order parabolic equations .
In part two , the goal is to derive some regularity estimates for fully nonlinearequations with weaker ( than concavity ) condition .
The a priori estimatefor fully nonlinear equations with concavity assumption is well developed.The understanding of former would give some applications tostochastic game theory , calibrated geometry , and nonlinear elasticitytheory .
In part three , the aim is to study the best constant in anisoperimetric inequality .
There is a sharp isoperimetric inequality in theEuclidean space with the standard flat metric .
An interesting question isthe corresponding one in negatively curved space .
An affirmative answerwould also give the sharp Sobolev inequality in the negatively curvedspace.The motivation of this project is to have some qualitative and quantativeinformation about our nature and society .
Since partial differentialequations model and even describe many phenomena in our world .
Estimatesfor solutions of partial differential equations are what we need .
Studyingthe equations posed in this project is important for both practical andtheoretical purposes , and has broad applications in many fields , such asheat transfer problems , chemical reaction , porous media , traffic flows , biology , and economics .
Proposal DMS-0072062AbstractProfessor Bromberg plans to study spaces of hyperbolic metrics on a fixed3-manifold .
Two types of questions will be investigated .
The first ofthese is a study of hyperbolic cone-manifolds .
Finite volumecone-manifolds arise naturally as a link between cusped hyperbolic3-manifolds and closed hyperbolic 3-manifolds .
Bromberg 's goal is toparameterize spaces of infinite volume hyperbolic cone-manifolds and usethis parameterization to understand non-singular hyperbolic structures.The second question involves the topology of deformation spaces ofcomplete , infinite volume metrics on open 3-manifolds .
Anderson and Canaryhave shown that the space of such metrics on a manifold of fixed homotopytype has a very complicated topology akin to that of the Mandelbrot setstudied in complex dynamics .
In joint work with J. Holt , Bromberg hasshown that this complicated behavior persists even if the deformationspace is restricted to metrics on a 3-manifold of fixed homeomorphism typegeneralizing work of McMullen .
Complex projective structures naturallyappear in both of these topics .
Bromberg also plans to study projectivestructures with a given discrete holonomy representation .
This project lies in the field of low dimensional topology and geometry.The main objects studied are three-manifolds which are spaces with onemore dimension than a surface ( a 2-manifold ) .
Three-manifolds , such as the space that we live in , are some of the most basicobjects in mathematics yet there are many simple questions about them thatwe can not answer .
A metric is a way of measuring distance on a 3-manifoldand a hyperbolic metric is one of a special class of metrics such that atevery point and in every direction the geometry locally looks the same.The work of W. Thurston has shown that most 3-manifolds carry ahyperbolic metric and earlier work of Ahlfors , Bers and others has shownthat an open 3-manifold that has an infinite volume hyperbolic metric willin fact have many hyperbolic metrics .
There is a vast program tounderstand all such metrics of which this project is a piece .
0104112PetrovaThis project addresses some problems in transport equations , Godunov type central schemes for hyperbolic conservation laws , classical and nonlinear approximation .
The common thread that runs through the proposed research is the use of techniques from approximation theory , harmonic and functional analysis ( Littlewood-Paley theory , wavelet decompositions , maximal functions , interpolation and K-functionals ) to prove analytic results in other areas of applied mathematics and to use these techniques to develop numerical methods .
Particular emphases will be placed on several issues development of a satisfactory theory for linear transport equations in several space dimensions which arise when linearizing the nonlinear problem , development of Godunov type central schemes for solving multidimensional systems of conservation laws , and application of these schemes to various problems and models .
Extensions of averaging lemmas to go from microscopic to macroscopic formulations will also be of primary concern .
A portion of this project will address fundamental questions in nonlinear approximation and multivariate cubature.The areas under discussion ( nonlinear approximation , analytical properties of solutions to transport equations and development of effective numerical methods for their computation ) are of significant practical interest .
The applications include image processing , statistical estimation , fluid mechanics , geophysics , meteorology , astrophysics , multi-component flows , ground water flow , semiconductors , and reactive flows .
This program will develop a quantitative relation between the observed solar wind and variations in the magnetic field in the Earth 's magnetosphere .
The new magnetic field model will be based on the previous work done by the PI in developing magnetospheric field models .
New data sets from the POLAR , GEOTAIL , CRRES , and GOES satellites will be correlated with Solar Wind parameters measured by the WIND and ACE satellites .
This program will make significant improvements to the most widely used magnetic field model in the Space physics and Space Weather community .
By indexing the resulting model to solar wind conditions it will provide a greatly improved forecast ability .
This research project is creating and evaluating multi-user virtual environments ( MUVEs ) that use digitized museum resources to enhance middle school students ' motivation and learning about science and its impacts on society .
MUVEs enable multiple simultaneous participants to access virtual architectures configured for learning , to interact with digital artifacts , to represent themselves through graphical avatars , to communicate both with other participants and with computer-based agents , and to enact collaborative activities of various types .
The project 's educational environments are extending current MUVE capabilities in order to study the science learning potential of interactive virtual museum exhibits and participatory historical situations in science units using the NSF-funded Multimedia and Thinking Skills ( MMTS ) program , an inquiry-centered curriculum engine .
George Mason University 's ( GMU ) Virtual Environments Lab , the Division of Information Technology and Society in the Smithsonian 's National Museum of American History ( NMAH ) , and pilot teachers from the Gunston Middle School in Arlington , Virginia are co-designing these MUVEs and implementing them in a variety of middle school settings .
In particular , this project is studying how the design characteristics of these learning experiences affect students ' motivation and educational outcomes , as well as the extent to which digitized museum can aid pupils ' performance on assessments related to national science standards .
This research also is examining both the process needed to successfully implement MMTS-based MUVEs in typical classroom settings and ways to enable strong learning outcomes across a wide range of individual student characteristics .
AbstractATM-9817560Crowley , Thomas J.Texas A & M UniversityTitle Comparative Study of Phanerozoic ClimatesThis award supports research on the comparative study of Phanerozoic climates .
The primary effort is focused on modeling studies involving both the last glacial maximum and the Carboniferous , Ordovician , and late Precambrian glaciations .
Specific research efforts include ( 1 ) comparison of model-predicted land temperatures for the last glacial maximum with data from the low latitudes ; ( 2 ) in-depth coupled climate-ice sheet model studies of carboniferous , Ordovician , and late Precambrian glaciations ; ( 3 ) initial climate-ice sheet model simulation of Phanerozoic ice volume levels for 20 different time intervals ; and ( 4 ) synthesis of results across time scales in order to check for self-consistency in model estimates of global climate sensitivity .
The ultimate aim of this research is to work toward development of a uniform theory for glaciation in earth history that is consistent with observations , employs the minimum number of adjustable parameters , and yields a climate sensitivity consistent with estimates from other time intervals .
Cell walls are carbohydrate and protein structures that surround and separate plant cells.As plant cells expand in a regulated fashion they must necessarily modify and enlargetheir cell walls to permit the subsequent increase in volume .
The cell wall itself mightinfluence this expansion process .
Thus the cell has the potential to influence almost everyaspect of plant function simply because of its position and physical properties .
For thisreason many have speculated on its role in a plant 's development and response to theoutside world .
Cell growth can occur in many dimensions , such as the polarizedexpansion of a pollen tube tip , the creation of elongated cells characteristic of manyvegetative tissues , the establishment of a meristem , or even the jigsaw-like arrangementof cells at the leaf surface .
Currently the understanding of how cell wall architecture iscoordinated with programmed and hormone regulated cell expansion events duringdevelopment is not well understood in angiosperms.Recent studies have identified a number of proteins at the cell surface that coulddirectly regulate cell wall functions , and the Cell Wall Associated Kinases , or WAKs , areamong these .
There are five cell wall associated kinases in Arabidopsis andrepresentatives in other angiosperm families .
WAKs each have a cytoplasmicserine/threonine protein kinase domain , span the plasma membrane and extend a domaininto the cell wall .
WAKs physically link the plasma membrane to the carbohydrate matrixand are unique in that they have the potential to directly signal cellular events throughtheir kinase domain.The WAK extracellular domain is variable between the five isoforms , and collectivelythe family is expressed in all organs .
WAK1 and WAK2 are the most ubiquitously andabundantly expressed of the five tandemly arrayed genes , and their messages are presentin vegetative meristems , junctions of organ types , and areas of cell expansion .
They arealso induced by pathogen infection and wounding .
The WAK1 but not WAK2 cell walldomain binds to a glycine rich protein ( GRP ) of the cell wall in in vitro assays .
WAK1and GRP can be co-immunoprecipitated from leaf or seedling extracts , and this WAK isphosphorylated .
Recent experiments demonstrate that antisense WAK expression leadsto the loss of cell expansion , and preliminary results indicate that antisense GRPproduction causes an enhancement of cell expansion ( and eventual cell death ) .
Thus GRPmay be a negative regulator of WAK activity .
A large amount of WAK is also covalentlylinked to pectin , and most of WAK that is bound to pectin is also phosphorylated .
Thedata support a model where WAK1 is bound to GRP as a phosphorylated kinase , and alsobinds to pectin .
How WAKs are involved in signaling from the pectin extracellular matrixin coordination with GRPs will be key to the understanding of the cell wall 's role in cellgrowth.WAKs are poised to provide a direct signal from the cell wall to the cytoplasm of manycell types during the development of Arabidopsis .
In order to characterize theassociations and roles of GRPs and WAKs in plants it will be necessary to generateadditional ( partial ) loss of function alleles of the two predominant WAKs and of GRP.These alleles can then be used to determine the relationship of WAK mediated cellexpansion to other known signaling pathways .
WAK kinase substrates will be alsoidentified and used to assay the activation of WAK by wall components anddevelopmental cues , and eventually mutant alleles of these substrates will help in theanalysis of WAKs and cell elongation .
The goal is to understand how WAKs inassociation with GRP and pectins regulate cytoplasmic components so that the cell wallis coordinated with processes of cell growth .
The Principal Investigator will consider a variety of problems concerning the asymptotic behavior of finite and infinite dimensional systems containing external parameters such as space and time , as the parameters become large .
In particular , the Principal Investigator will consider the long-time behavior of solutions of the perturbed focusing Nonlinear Schrodinger equation , with initial data that is close to a solution .
In addition , the Principal Investigator will consider statistical problems arising in the theory of permutations of N numbers as N becomes large , as well as questions concerning the rational approximation of special numbers such as z ( 5 ) where z is the Riemann zeta function .
The Principal Investigator will also consider the computation of various physical constants arising in integrable models .
In all the above problems , a key analytical role will be played by the steepest descent method for Riemann-Hilbert problems introduced by Xin Zhou and the Principal Investigator in 1993 .
Much of the work proposed by the Principal Investigator has a strong interdisciplinary flavor .
For example , the statistical problems mentioned above for permutations of N numbers , are intimately related to a model for the condensation of a supersaturated liquid on a substrate and also to a version of solitaire ( patience sorting ) , and also to the problem of re-ordering a library in which books have been improperly shelved .
In addition , a key objective of the Principle Investigator will be to prove universality for a variety of physical systems .
For example , motivated by earlier work with Xin Zhou , the Principal Investigator plans to show that solutions of the perturbed focusing Non-Linear Schrodinger equation behave just like solutions of the unperturbed focusing Non-linear Schrodinger equation , once the scales of the problem are properly adjusted .
This is a key step in the development of models for a wide variety of physical phenomena , in particular for phenomena arising in the transmission of signals along optical fibers .
Large scale sample surveys are usually designed to produce reliable estimates of various characteristics of interest for large geographic areas .
However , for effective planning of health , social , and other services , there is a growing demand to produce similar estimates for smaller geographic areas and subpopulations , commonly referred to as small-areas ( or small-domains ) .
The accuracy of small-area statistics is especially crucial when data are used to apportion government funds among various groups.This project focuses on development of new robust small-area estimation methods and the associated model diagnostics .
The estimation methods will be developed under general multi-level models which will be useful in solving a variety of small-area estimation problems .
To address an important and yet largely neglected aspect of model validation and model selection associated with multi-level models , a test using a sample splitting technique is proposed .
Splitting the sample into an estimation set and a validation set can also be used for assessing the actual power of the model .
This area of research will continue to grow as social scientists find the need to use complex multi-level models to solve their problems.The research is an outgrowth of the investigators ' experiences with small-area estimation problems encountered by various federal , state , and private agencies .
Importantly , this project will address a crucial practical problem underlying the work of many governmental and private institutions throughout the world .
Further , this research on small-area estimation also will contribute significantly to the literature on survey sampling , generalized linear mixed models , empirical best prediction theory , linear empirical Bayes , variance component estimation , resampling methods , model diagnostics , higher order asymptotics , and statistical computing .
Because of the interests of different types of researchers ( e.g. , survey samplers , main stream statisticians , social scientists ) , small-area estimation will remain one of the most intriguing problems in survey sampling as we advance into the next millennium .
The role of mating preferences in shaping interspecific divergence in mating signals in mollies ( Poeciliidae Poecilia Molliensia ) .
Margaret B. PtacekThe importance of female mating preferences in shaping the features of male mating signals within a species is well established .
However , the influence of female mating preferences within a species on the divergence of these mating signals between species is just beginning to be explored .
This project is designed to explore the role of female mating preferences in generating and maintaining the behavioral and morphological changes associated with divergence between sailfin and shortfin mollies ( Poeciliidae Poecilia Mollienesia ) .
Mollies are an ideal model system for such a study because they exhibit enormous diversity in male secondary sexual characteristics and mating behaviors both within and between species .
Differences in the two major species complexes of mollies ( sailfin and shortfin species ) are associated with divergence in their mating systems .
Males of sailfin species have a greatly enlarged dorsal fin that they fan in front of females in a characteristic courtship display used to elicit female cooperation in mating .
Males of shortfin species show neither the enlarged dorsal fin nor perform courtship display behavior .
Previous studies have shown that females of sailfin species use particular features of the enlarged dorsal fin and courtship display to distinguish both between different males of their own species and between males of their own species and males of shortfin species .
Such a pattern of similar female mating preferences at both the intra- and interspecific levels argues that sexual selection may have played an important role in promoting the divergence in these traits between sailfin and shortfin species of mollies .
In addition , the phylogenetic ( genealogical ) relationships of the entire molly group have been determined .
This phylogeny will provide a framework upon which to study the origin and direction of change in male secondary sexual traits and behaviors as well as the origin of female preferences for these traits in a number of sailfin and shortfin molly species .
The research proposed here will determine how female mating preferences can shape the divergence of male mating signals both within and between species .
Few tests of the relationship between sexual selection and species recognition have been performed and mollies offer an ideal system in which to investigate this link .
The results of the proposed studies will provide an important model for how sexual selection might lead to the evolution of premating reproductive isolating mechanisms and eventual speciation in a group of poeciliid fishes for which much is already known about behavioral , ecological and life history trait evolution .
0104847SchemskeThe proposed research investigates the mechanisms that contribute to species boundaries in two closely related , Neotropical gingers .
The study species live in the same tropical forests in Central America , flower at the same time and are pollinated largely by the same species of hummingbird .
Yet they differ in a number of leaf and flower characters , and never produce hybrid offspring .
What keeps these species distinct ?
The research will use experimental crosses , field observations and molecular genetic techniques to answer this question .
The information gathered thus far suggests that crosses in one direction fail because pollen growth is inhibited , while reproductive failure in the other direction is caused by the inability of the pollen to grow far enough to produce seeds .
The research findings will ultimately show the subtle , but effective means that allow different species to coexist .
One of the great mysteries of Nature is how species retain their distinctive characteristics .
Without mechanisms to prevent interbreeding , the diversity of species would be far less than what we see today .
Understanding how these reproductive barriers function in natural populations provides insights useful for both the development of new agricultural varieties and for the conservation and management of biodiversity .
Some mechanisms of protein trafficking through the secretory system are conserved among all eukaryotes ; nevertheless , plants possess a highly complex vacuolar targeting machinery .
The complexity is the result of the diverse nature of vacuoles in some cell types .
At least two distinct types of vacuolar structure have been observed one with a lytic and one with a storage function .
Proteins of the secretory pathway are usually first inserted into the endoplasmic reticulum before being transported through the endomembrane system in small transport vesicles .
Vacuolar proteins have signals that sort them to vacuoles ; if such signals are deleted , vacuolar proteins are instead secreted from the plant cell .
The plant vacuolar sorting signals identified to date fall into three classes N-terminal propeptides ( NTPPs ) , C-terminal propeptides ( CTPPs ) , and much less characterized portions of mature proteins .
A putative vacuolar sorting receptor has been identified in pea ( BP80 ) and in Arabidopsis ( AtELP ) , and it likely functions in the route taken by the proteins with NTPP signals .
This putative receptor has been found in the Golgi , trans-Golgi network ( TGN ) -derived vesicles , and in the prevacuolar compartment ( PVC ) .
Although transport between the TGN and PVC is critical for faithful delivery of cargo proteins to the vacuole , very little is known about this process in any multicellular organism .
This project will focus on mechanisms that mediate transport between the TGN and PVC .
Experiments to be carried out in this project aim at investigating further ( 1 ) the mechanisms and diversity of NTPP pathway in plants , ( 2 ) the in vivo function of the putative vacuolar sorting receptor , ( 3 ) the PVC , and ( 4 ) vesicles that deliver cargo to that compartment .
Although much work has been done with Arabidopsis , no endogenous vacuolar proteins from this plant have as yet been characterized and no reliable antibodies against vacuolar proteins are available .
Dr. Raikhel will prepare and characterize antibodies against vacuolar markers to analyze transport of Arabidopsis proteins to the vacuoles using information available in the Arabidopsis EST database and by purifying proteins from isolated vesicles .
These endogenous markers and her laboratory 's well-characterized heterologous markers will be used to analyze trafficking in both wild-type and Arabidopsis mutants created in the course of this research .
The putative vacuolar sorting receptor , AtELP , is a representative of a small gene family .
Characterization of the cargo specificity of AtELP has been done only in in vitro assays ; no proteins that bind AtELP in vivo have been identified .
One important question is whether AtELP and related proteins interact with a number of different vacuolar sorting signals or only with NTPP-containing cargo .
Dr. Raikhel will try to answer this question using experimental strategies that include reverse genetics , biochemistry , and cell biology .
The nature and function of the PVC in plants is not well defined .
Unlike in yeast , most SNARE proteins that mediate trafficking between the Golgi and PVC in plants are represented by small gene families .
In addition , the Principal Investigator has found that in plants , some SNARE proteins have different roles than in yeast .
Experiments will address the question of whether this is a result of redundancy or functional complexity of plant SNAREs , and structural and functional diversity of the plant PVCs .
They will also examine the cargo and resident proteins of the PVC to see whether only proteins found in the AtELP-carrying vesicles are present in the PVC , or whether the PVC is a compartment where vesicles taking different routes deliver their cargo .
They will use immunoprecipitation experiments followed by a proteomic approach to obtain sequence information of cargo proteins from various vesicles and the PVC.This research will provide important insights into the fundamental processes of vacuolar sorting in multicellular organisms that may be unique to plants and are of broad significance .
Beyond its contribution to basic knowledge , this work will improve the success rate of sorting novel gene products to desired parts of the cell , an important aspect of crop design and biopharming .
The proposed work will use statistical optimal detection methods to improve the ratio of anthropogenic signal to internal climate variability and allow for an earlier detection of changes .
'Fingerprints ' for the expected spatial and temporal evolution of changes in extremes will be derived from climate model simulations .
A detection study first applying model data only , will be performed to explore which extreme value indices should show the earliest detectable changes .
The PI will also examine which procedure of detection is most promising for an early detection of changes in extremes , as well as which variable or combination of variables can and should be applied .
The most promising procedure will be applied to observations .
The focus is on temperature extremes , length of wet and dry periods and precipitation extremes , particularly over several days .
Daily observations from land stations , mainly from the US , Canada , Europe , Russia , China and Japan will be used .
The work is important because it will lead to increased understanding on climate change detection techniques .
Frequently , applications that require several hours to a few weeks to execute on typical desktop computers are ported to supercomputers or large compute servers .
Not only is this option costly , but often the entire program must be rewritten to effectively utilize multiple processors and other resources available on these systems .
Reconfigurable computing ( RC ) systems can offer an advantage over this option since RC systems have been demonstrated that deliver performance approaching that of a supercomputer at a fraction of the cost .
However , not only could it take several months to complete an RC system design , but RC system developers must be trained in both hardware design and software development.The research project will develop a Remote Adaptive-Computing REsource on the Internet ( RARE ) that will assist scientists and engineers in solving problems that require excessive execution time when solved on a typical desktop computer .
RARE comprises a comprehensive set of routines that have been optimized for high performance on a reconfigurable computer .
A novel client/server program interface , developed as a part of this research effort , will manage the loading and execution of user process requests .
The user interface to the resource consists of a library of functions and procedures that perform typical scientific/engineering computations .
The goal of the project is to speedup local and remote versions of scientific data processing applications by orders of magnitude at reduced costs .
Users of the system need only call a local or remote procedure that executes the application on the reconfigurable computing resource .
A novel feature is that data is sent to RARE from a remote site , processed on hardware that has been optimized to perform a particular task significantly faster than a typical desktop computer , and transmitted back to the user via the Internet.Recent experiments verify that remote hardware versions of several algorithms ( implemented on a reconfigurable computer ) can complete execution significantly faster than logical software versions of the same algorithm ( implemented on a typical desktop computer ) .
This statement is true in spite of the communication overhead that is present due to data transmission via the Internet .
Applications in the area of Computational Fluid Dynamics ( CFD ) are prime candidates for this resource since many of these computer simulation models require enormous execution times .
Typically , CFD simulations require the solution of a large number of simultaneous equations or extensive computation of derivatives and/or integrals .
One such CFD model , developed at NC State , requires two weeks to run on a desktop computer and this model is only a subset of the complete system simulation .
Software profiling reports obtained during execution of these models demonstrate that more than 70 % of the total execution time is spent in a small number of atomic procedures .
Hence , these applications are the primary focus of this research project .
The rapidly expanding information superhighway allows the storage and retrieval ofinformation in a highly distributed information infrastructure .
Yet this infrastructurerequires users to maintain a fixed and universally known position in the network , which restricts user mobility and portability , so users can not access data fromanywhere and at any time .
Now the next step is to make the information superhighwayavailable to mobile users .
But this requires fundamental research that takes mobility , variable communication conditions , energy limitations and high frequency of disconnectioninto account when providing access to this distributed information infrastructure .
Toreach this goal , intensive cooperation of researchers from a number of differentcommunitiesincluding the different wireless , distributed systems and information systems communitiesis necessary .
Such collaboration currently appears at a risk .
In view of this , ourobjective is todefine and establish a common infrastructure of the discipline and to develop a consensusbased document that will provide a foundation for implementation and standardization aswell as further research .
This infrastructure will foster collaboration between thesedifferent communities .
Such collaboration is necessitated by teh current needs ofwirelesstechnologies , if new horizons of research and development are to be achieved in the nextmillennium .
The goal of this project is to develop novel interprocedural techniques for compiling scientific and engineering applications on distributed address space parallel machines .
With recent advances in parallel and supercomputing architectures , the application programmers have unprecedented computational power available .
However , it has also become increasingly difficult to harness this power .
The parallelizing and optimizing compilers usually turn out to be inadequate , since they restrict the analysis to a single procedure level .
However , by developing a set of novel effective and efficient interprocedural techniques , the efficacy of the parallel compilers can be enhanced significantly , without significallty slowing the compilation process .
In message passing machines and distributed shares memory machines , the compilation process involves several complex tasks , including data distribution , locality management , placement of communication and/or synchronization , and aggregating remote memory accesses .
This project will develop new interprocedural techniques for performing these phases of analysis interprocedurally .
9801069 Garst This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will develop a prototype handwriting based input system for mathematical notation which demonstrates the ease of use , recognition accuracy and editing power required to make computer input of mathematical equations easier than writing them on a pad of paper .
This will solve the persistent problem of tedious and difficult input methods for text formatters , technical assistants and other systems which require input of mathematical notation .
The proposed work includes collection of handwritten mathematical data , investigation of a usable interface and editing system , and research into a fast and accurate recognizer for handwritten notation .
The market for natural and efficient input of mathematical notation is potentially very large , spread across a range of innovative products for students and professionals in many technical , business and educational fields .
Potential applications include easy electronic communication of mathematical notation ; far more productive word processors for technical notation ; handheld calculators which accept symbolic problems as easily as numeric ones ; and others .
CIC is in a strong position to pursue commercialization .
Its licensees include IBM , NEC , Nortel and many others .
This research program is concerned with empirical investigations of the diffusion of new technology , the evolution of industry structure , and firm survival , all in the context of the North American merchant shipbuilding and merchant shipping industries from c.1789 to the twentieth century .
The two main pur-poses of this project are ( 1 ) to test between two competing theories of technological diffusion based on vintage-specific human capital and on learning , and ( 2 ) to study patterns of industry evolution and the determinants of firm survival with the particular focus of conducting discriminating tests between recent models of industry shakeouts.These tests will be conducted using new panel data on US shipyards and Canadian shippers , and on a large dataset of individual wage contracts struck between mariners and their employers on voyages leav-ing Canadian Atlantic ports .
The data span periods of between 80 and 120 years .
The Canadian data were recently made available to researchers , while the US data will be constructed from primary sources .
These data are uniquely valuable for the study of technology because they identify the precise technology em-ployed by firms and the precise technology with which employees were working.Tests of theories of diffusion will focus on the discriminating predictions arising from models in which human capital is specific to technology of a given vintage , and those in which individual firms and workers learn about , and expend resources in order to switch to , new technologies .
At the firm level , the vintage-specific human capital model predicts a negative correlation between the rate of technological diffusion and the variance of technologies in uses , while the learning model predicts a positive correla-tion .
At the individual worker level , the vintage-specific human capital model predicts a steeper age-earnings profile for employees matched with recent vintages of technology , but that expected lifetime earnings for all workers are the same .
The learning model , in contrast , predicts higher expected lifetime earnings for workers who master new technologies earlier.Recent theories of industry evolution have focused on the shakeout , a robust feature of the industry life cycle in which firm exit rates rise dramatically in a short period of time .
Several recent studies have explained the shakeout in terms of differential success in adopting new technologies , while others have argued that variations in exit rates are simply a result of earlier variations in entry rates .
Among studies arguing for the importance of technology , the role of firm scale has been treated differently .
The research focuses on two main lines of inquiry First , to what extent does the adoption of new technology matter for firm survival ?
Put another way , is firm age a sufficient statistic for firm growth and survival , or does technology choice matter ?
Second , is current scale an important indicator of the probability that a firm will eventually succeed in adopting new technology ?
These questions will be addressed using the panel of shipyards to measure the effects of firm size .
firm age , and current technology on firm growth and sur-vival .
The persistence and widespread occurrence of cross-fertilization is widely recognized as one of the most interesting challenges for the theory of evolution by natural selection .
One promising theory is that , by creating genetically variable progeny , cross-fertilization is favored as a way to reduce the risk of infection by parasites that evolve to attack common host genotypes .
Here we test some important predictions and assumptions of this theory .
The specific objectives are five fold ( 1 ) to determine whether parasites can evolve under laboratory conditions to infect individual host genotypes , and whether such a response entails a trade-off in ability to infect other host genotypes ; ( 2 ) to create and experimentally infect hybrid snails to determine the genetic basis of infection ; ( 3 ) to extend a seven-year study of the evolutionary dynamics of host genotypes and their infection by parasites in a natural population ; ( 4 ) to measure the rate of mutation accumulation as a test of an alternative theory that cross fertilization helps eliminate harmful mutations ; and ( 5 ) to provide a direct experimental test of the parasite hypothesis .
The results will be of interest to epidemiologists , crop plant pathologists , and conservation biologists interested in the interplay between host genetic diversity and the effects of coevolving parasites and pathogens .
The results will also be of wide interest to evolutionary biologists interested in the effects of natural selection on the reproductive strategies of plants and animals .
This research is an investigation into fundamental aspects of computer-aided design of VLSI circuits .
Topics include high level synthesis , logic synthesis and physical design , with an emphasis on the application of modern combinatorial optimization technique for the solution of complex design automation problems The research has two orthogonal themes , one in low power design in high level and logic synthesis , and the other in algorithmic approaches to physical design problems .
The second theme is computational technique oriented , showing how techniques such as linear , integer and convex programming and network flow can be applied to the solution of design automation problems .
A coupled materials processing - experimental testing - mathematical modeling program will study how variations in processing time-temperature conditions effect the strength of the self thermal-plastic response of NiTi shape memory alloy fiber actuated aluminum metal matrix composites , and will investigate how the development of very high internal stresses in the material influence mechanical fatigue behavior .
Preliminary results have shown that a properly processed and prepared NiTi shape memory alloy fiber actuated aluminum metal matrix composite ( SMA-MMC ) will exhibit very large , self imposed thermal-plastic compressive deformation under heating .
Unfortunately , very little is presently known about the processing sensitivity and thermo-mechanical-fatigue behavior of the material .
We therefore propose the following three major tasks Task 1 Systematically measure how controlled variations in high temperature hot press consolidation processing conditions effect the shape recovery of the resulting SMA-MMC , and determine the mechanism ( s ) responsible for the material performance changes .
Task 2 Perform a tensile cycle fatigue endurance study , identifying the fatigue damage development process in the material .
Task 3 Mathematically model the self thermal plastic response of the material accommodating general variations in matrix strength , matrix flow properties , fiber volume fraction , fiber transformation properties , and temperature histories .
The overall goal of the program is to provide a quantitative design tool for the scientific development of safety and cost critical commercial and military applications .
9802444 Eom This University/Industry collaborative GOALI proposal aims for greater understanding of barrier phenomena/physics in oxide ferromagnetic-insulator-ferromagnetic trilayer junctions , interfacial effects , and the electronic structure of ( Sr , Ca ) RuO3 .
Professor Chang-Beom Eom at Duke University is collaborating with Jonathan Z .
Sun at the IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center .
The approach involves the study and control of the growth mechanism and domain structures of individual layers , and the investigation of junction properties to obtain reliable and low defect density interfaces and insulating layers .
The project also addresses the mechanism for spin-dependent transport across the barrier region , the bias and temperature dependence of junction magnetoresistance , and the relationships between transport behavior , barrier synthesis/processing conditions , and chemical compositions .
The project is co-supported by the DMR Electronic Materials Program and the MPS OMA ( Office of Multidisciplinary Activities ) .
% % % The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials science having high technological relevance .
The research will contribute basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental level to important aspects of electronic/magnetic devices .
Experimental tools are now available to allow atomic level observation of basic surface and interface processes which when better understood will allow advances in both fundamental and technological arenas .
The basic knowledge and understanding gained from the research is expected to contribute to improving the performance and stability of advanced devices and circuits by providing a fundamental understanding and a basis for designing and producing improved materials , and materials combinations .
An important feature of the program is the integration of research and education through the training of students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area , and in providing an impor tant opportunity through the GOALI aspect of the project for students to experience both academic and industrial research approaches and environments .
*** The purpose of this planning grant is to provide infrastructure for long-term research on Athabaskan languages , with a focus on Tahltan , a critically endangered language of northwest British Columbia .
A set of data collection , organization and analysis activities are proposed to study the structure of verbs .
Verb forms are fundamental in the study of Athabaskan languages because they provide crucial information about the structure and interpretation of sentences ( i.e. , the syntax and semantics ) .
They are also important in the description of sound structure ( or the phonology ) because the different domains in an Athabaskan verb represent different sound systems .
Verbs are thus fundamental to subsequent documentation of Tahltan , i.e. , dictionaries , texts , grammars , and theoretical hypothesis testing , all of which fall within the scope of this long-term research program.Verbs in Athabaskan languages are made up of a stem , which contributes the principal meaning of the word , and two classes of prefixes , namely the disjunct and conjunct prefixes .
The disjunct prefixes form a class with stems because they are lexical items and have the full range of phonological structures .
These properties distinguish disjunct prefixes and stems from the conjunct prefixes , which are not lexical items and have a highly restricted set of phonological structures .
One chief aim is to give a natural account of the differences between these two morphological classes , for both the lexical/non-lexical distinction and their different phonologies .
A set of hypotheses are developed in Optimality Theory that explain this correlation in terms the adherence of different morpheme types to their underlying representation .
A host of predictions are made concerning the range of possible phonological structures and the types of processes expected in each word domain.The research plan begins with the study of Navajo verbs , both to evaluate the optimality theoretic analysis in a well-documented Athabaskan language , and as a way to provide a framework for primary linguistic documentation of Tahltan .
Existing sound recordings of Tahltan will be digitized , and the fieldnotes and word lists associated with them will be incorporated in a database of large corpora that can be searched electronically .
This database will clarify specific research questions and provide a guideline for additional data collection .
Three trips in the field are planned to confirm the data and generalizations of previous work and to supplement the study of verb forms .
The resulting relational database and grammatical sketches will provide the first complete description of verbs and materials for testing specific hypotheses about the morphological and phonological structures of verb forms .
In addition , the lexical database will make possible a variety of other research and teaching activities that extend beyond the scope of verb structure .
This is a collaborative study with German scientists from GEOMAR , as part of the MEGAPRINT expedition that took place aboard the R/V Sonne during 2001 .
The field program sampled critical , unmapped sections of the eastern Galapagos Spreading Center ( GSC ) and portions of young seafloor between the archipelago and the spreading center .
Elements of the program included multi-beam seafloor mapping , shipboard gravity and magnetic surveys , and sampling of lavas by dredging at ~15 km spacing along the eastern GSC , and at numerous off-axis seamounts and volcanic ridges .
Guided by ~100 major element glass analyses already completed , the PIs propose an analytical program that will determine trace element contents , He , Pb , Nd , Sr and Hf isotope compositions , volatile ( CO2 , H2O , Cl , F and S ) contents and 40Ar-39Ar radiometric ages of a representative suite of these submarine glasses and rocks .
Geophysical data from German colleagues will provide additional constraints on age , structure , thickness and tectonics of the crust and lithosphere .
0241246Holmes Classical statistics has developed various averages , projections and representations based on linear algebra .
In recent years , non-numerical data and parameters have emerged .
The object of this project is to provide ways of averaging , building confidence regions , running Monte Carlo algorithms , doing regression and testing models for rooted binary trees .
Currently biologists validate their phylogenetic trees by perturbing the data through a simple bootstrap of the columns of DNA sequences and then summarizing the collection of trees obtained by associating p-values to the branches of a consensus tree .
This reduces the problem to a collection of binomial parameters , losing much of the multivariate information .
A more geometrical procedure based on confidence regions in tree space is preferable and overcomes the multiple testing problem .
The projects extends both Bayesian and frequentist inferential procedures for binary trees to a nonparametric context using a complete geometric construction of the relevant tree space .
The mathematical tools include probability theory , topology and algebraic combinatorics .
Collaboration with Louis Billera and Karen Vogtmann ( Cornell Mathematics Dept .
) has enhanced our mathematical understanding of tree space .
The space of trees has negative curvature , thus we know we can define geodesics on this space as well as convex hulls .
Many of the actual distance computations can have exponential complexity , good approximation algorithms are important for the applications considered .
This work helps think about the statistics of biological networks as generalizations or mixtures of trees .
A new type of data has appeared in genetics and molecular biology , these data are not real numbers or vectors , but trees , family trees or phylogenetic trees relating different species and hierarchical clustering trees relating different genes according to their differing expression patterns .
This project provides programs for visualizing and doing statistics on these new data , we will provide the biologists with open source computer packages that they can use to analyze their own data .
For instance , classical linear regression is based on projections ; in the same way if we want to compare two sets of trees , we will use distances and methods for projecting in tree space .
The project includes two workshops , one for mathematicians in the first stage , to publicize some of the harder open problems , and another in the last year to teach biologists how to use the geometrical tools developed in matlab or R in practical examples .
This grant is made under the Joint DMS/NIGMS Initiative to Support Research Grants in the Area of Mathematical Biology .
This is a joint competition sponsored by the Division of Mathematical Sciences ( DMS ) at the National Science Foundation and the National Institute of General Medical Sciences ( NIGMS ) at the National Institutes of Health .
Berloff0241131Transport and mixing in the ocean will be studied using a sequence of models .
Initially , a quasi-geostrophic model will be used to produce 'true ' velocity fields .
The resultant turbulent velocities will be used to transport Lagrangian particles throughout the domain .
The results will be compared to modeled dispersion using a sequence of Markov models ( orders 0 , 1 , 2 , and 3 ) .
These allow for diffusive , ballistic , sub and super diffusive behavior .
These studies will also be used to understand the phenomenological behavior of the models .
Results of the stochastic models will be compared with observed float characteristics from different regions of the ocean .
More realistic , primitive equation models will also be investigated .
Effects of low-frequency variability in flow structure , wind-forcing variability , eddy-induced flows , three-dimensional flows , and sources will be investigated .
Two other questions of interest are the impact of rough topography and the impact of non-Gaussian forcing in the Markovian models .
Incorporation of stochastic terms in the Eulerian partial differential equations , to simulate the role of the Markov models , is contemplated towards the end of the project .
ABSTRACTThis proposal deals with various aspects of discrete Schroedinger equationson the one dimensional lattice with deterministic potentials .
So far , in collaboration with Jean Bourgain and Michael Goldstein , the author has considered quasi-periodic potentials given by ergodic shifts on tori , potentials obtained by means of the skew-shift on the two torus , as well as potentials defined in terms of strongly mixing dynamics , such as the doubling map on the circle or hyperbolic automorphisms on the two torus .
In each of these cases , positivity of the Lyapunov exponent , regularity of the integrated density of states , and Anderson localization were studied .
At this point , we are planning to address several remaining questions , including the following ones1 ) Is the Lyapunov exponent positive in case of skew-shift potentials for small disorder ?
2 ) Is it possible to obtained detailed information on the nature of the eigenfunctions in the quasi-periodic case assuming only positivity of the Lyapunov exponent ?
In fact , do the non perturbative techniques allow the definition of the essential support as described in the perturbative regime by Sinai and Froehlich , Spencer , Wittwer ?
These questions are intimately linked with Y. G. Sinai 's recent work on anomalous transport in quasi-periodic media , and would provide better and more precise information on the subdiffusive behavior of the random walk considered by Sinai .
3 ) Is it possible to extend the nonperturbative methods to strips , or the two-dimensional plane ? 4 ) Is the integrated density of states Holder continuous in the case of several frequencies or the skew-shift ?
5 ) What can be said about the statistics of the level-spacings of the eigen values for the case of the skew-shift ? Historically , the study of random Schroedinger operators started with PhilAnderson 's work in the late 1950 's , for which he received the Nobel prize.Before his work it was believed that small random impurities in a crystalwould not significantly change its conductance .
Anderson , however , showed that this is not the case Arbitrarily small random impurities occurringindependently at each lattice site turn a conductor into an insulator .
Sincehis work , which was not mathematically rigorous , the development of a precisetheory of Anderson localization has been pursued by many mathematicians .
It turned out that there were connections with deep results from several areas of mathematics .
For example , Fuerstenberg 's theorem on products of random matrices was a crucial tool in the development of the theory .
These works attracted the attention of physicists , particularly experts in statistical mechanics .
To this day , there is an active and fruitful exchange of ideas between mathematicians and physicists in this subject .
In fact , the interest in random phenomena and methods has intensified quite notably in physics in recent years , as many important problems posed by statistical mechanics have proved to be rather deep mathematical challenges whose solution has lead to significant advances of probabilistic techniques.It is our hope that the projects set forth in this proposal will furtheradvance our insight into the models of statistical mechanics as well as providing useful tools for mathematicians working in ergodic theory , analysis , and mathematical physics .
This study will document and analyze the recent history ( 1970-present ) of symbiotic nitrogen fixation ( SNF ) research , conducting oral history and ethnographic interviews with leading scientists to map both the major scientific transformations that SNF research has undergone during this period , and the changing social , political , and economic context in which SNF research has been conducted .
The study will also draw from participant observation at interdisciplinary conferences and a review of the primary scientific literature .
The study will focus on research surrounding two economically and scientifically significant symbiotic associations , that of the soybean ( Glycine max ) with the bacterium B. phaseolus , and that of the model plant organism Medicago truncatula ( a relative of alfalfa ) with the bacterium S. meliloti .
The historical and ethnographic study of the research activity and groups around these two symbiotic systems will illuminate key achievements and trends in the field of SNF research , and will provide rich empirical material for contributing to key thematic areas in the social studies of science literature .
The study will also draw out the changing institutional and social context of SNF research , in a period shaped by the energy crisis of the 1970s , the promise of profitable agricultural biotechnology ventures in the 1980s , ecological concerns , and visions of sustainable agriculture and reduced reliance on synthetic fertilizers , for both the U.S. and the developing world .
The study has two primary aims To create new knowledge about the effects of technological change within the sciences , and within SNF research in particular ; To create new knowledge about the political-economic , institutional , social and ethical dimensions of scientific research on nitrogen fixation .
The study will result in presentations at conferences , journal articles , and a book It will also contribute to existing literatures focused on the scientific and institutional effects of the diffusion of genomic technologies since the 1970s ; on the importance of model organisms in the development of genetics research ; on the history of theories of symbiosis ; on changing modes of institutional support for science since the 1970s ; on the shape and effect of interdisciplinary collaboration in the sciences ; on the role of women in the sciences ; and on the ethical thinking of scientists .
Health and Safety Guidelines for Emergency Workers Post-Structural Collapse Hazards Under the direction of Dr. J. W. K. Harris , Mr. David R. Braun will conduct his doctoral research on the ecology of stone artifacts in the time period known as the terminal Pliocene ( ~2 Ma ) .
He will initiate excavations at new localities in the world famous Koobi Fora region known for its wealth of early human fossils and artifacts .
These excavations will provide a comparison with one of the most exciting new finds in early human archaeology Kanjera South .
The site of Kanjera south has several thousand well-preserved bones and artifacts .
With possible evidence of animal butchery and long distance transport of artifacts this site is on par with the Olduvai localities of Tanzania in its potential to elucidate early human behavior .
Mr. Braun will compare interpretations of early human behaviors at these sites , as viewed through the window of lithic ( stone tool ) analysis .
Lithics are a behavioral trace of the interface between early humans and their environments .
Paleoenvironmental reconstructions at Koobi Fora paint a picture of a lake- and river-dominated ecosystem , with areas of swampy woodlands .
Meanwhile , Kanjera is reconstructed as an open savannah grassland .
A focus of Mr. Braun 's analysis will be to compare the behaviors of early humans in the variable environments of the terminal Pliocene.Mr .
Braun 's analysis of these artifacts will incorporate various new techniques to understand the importance of stone tools to these proto-humans .
To determine the distances that early humans traveled to collect stones to make artifacts geochemical techniques ( Energy Dispersive X-Ray Flourescence ) will be used to link artifacts to rock outcrops .
This analysis is the result of an important collaboration between American researchers and the Institute of Nuclear Science at the University of Nairobi .
Furthermore , his analysis will incorporate digital imaging of stone artifacts .
These techniques have not previously been employed on materials of such antiquity .
Preliminary results from digital imaging analysis suggest evolution in early human ranging patterns and landscape use.Crucial to an understanding of early human behavior is investigating the need and use of stone tools .
Mr. Braun 's analysis will approach stone artifacts using experimentally derived models to test theories of optimality in early human stone tool use .
By applying an evolutionary ecological framework to the study of artifact assemblages in varying environments it is possible to further our understanding of the heterogeneity of early human behavior .
The support of this project will provide vital new insights into the evolution of human behavior and further the career of a student committed to the study of African archaeology .
ABSTRACTOCE-0242160OCE-0241363Even though the meso- and bathypelagic regions beneath the euphotic zone contain nearly all of the oceans volume , little is known about the biogeochemical processes that function in this region .
For this reason , a PI from Scripps Institute of Oceanography will collaborate with a PI from Harvard University to determine which carbon sources fuel prokaryotic production in the meso- and bathypelagic ocean .
Specifically , the PIs wish to address the following two questions ( 1 ) Is freshly-produced organic matter the primary dissolved organic carbon ( DOC ) pool that is accessible to deep ocean heterotrophic prokaryotes or is old DOC also bioavailable ?
; and ( 2 ) Is chemoautotrophic fixation of inorganic carbon by planktonic archaea an important component of the deep ocean carbon cycle ?
To address these questions , the PIs plan to measure the radiocarbon ( 14C ) concentration of the carbon source pools and the resulting prolaryotic ( bacterial and archaeal ) biomass at the surface , meso ( 500-600 m ) and bathypelagic ( > 900 m ) depths .
In addition , fluorescent in-situ hybridization ( FISH ) and genetic diversity analysis by denaturing gradient gel electrophorsis ( DGGE ) will provide a complementary picture of the biological community .
Lastly , to obtain the large quantities of biomass-derived carbon needed for this study , the PIs plan to develop an in-situ , battery powered , submersible pump capable of pumping 20,000L of seawater per deployment during the first year of the study .
This Doctoral Dissertation Research Support project is a comparative study of the public sphere in West and North Africa and of the contextual forces shaping the public and political domains .
In particular , the research investigates tensions between the overlapping spheres of state and religious authority , and what this means for democratic politics and reform .
To these ends , the project asks how individuals in Senegal and Morocco form political attitudes toward the state and how individuals conceptualize their own roles as citizens of a national state .
Analysis is undertaken to take account of the processes of political communication during which individuals come to understand their relationship with the state .
The research tests hypotheses regarding the effects of social influence herein defined as contextual influences such as religion and the neighborhood on political actions , attitudes and identities .
This research investigates contextual effects in non-Western settings and looks at local social interactions in two predominately Muslim countries with histories of French colonial occupation .
The selection of cases allows for cross-cultural and cross-regional comparisons and embeds variations in political systems , racial and ethnic differences , and Islamic religious practices .
Senegal provides a case in which , though democratic , power was transferred to the opposition through electoral means for the first time in 2000 .
Though democratic reforms have been implemented in Morocco 's constitutional monarchy , no transition has yet taken place .
Insights from the research in Senegal and Morocco will enhance understanding of citizenship and political attitude formation in developing and democratizing countries more generally , and specifically in those with Muslim majorities .
Abstract In this project the investigator and his collaborator intend to develop an analogue in the p-adic setting of the Riemann-Hilbert correspondence between perverse sheaves and D-modules on algebraic varieties over the complex numbers .
The Hilbert correspondence generalizes De Rham theory , and establishes a deep connection between the topology of a given complex algebraic variety ( as encoded in the category of perverse sheaves on the variety ) and the behavior of systems of differential operators defined on the variety ( which are encoded as D-modules on the variety ; that is , as sheaves of modules over the sheaf of rings of differential operators on the variety ) .
The proposed p-adic analogue would perform a similar function for varieties over the p-adic numbers .
It would yield an equivalence between the ( currently conjectural ) category of `` crystalline perverse sheaves '' on such a variety , and the ( again conjectural ) category of weakly admissible filtered D-modules equipped with a Frobenius operator .
The category of crystalline perverse sheaves is believed to carry both geometric and also arithmetic information about the variety to which it is attached , and would for example be a natural ingredient in a p-adic analogue of Beilinson 's theory of regulators .
This gives some hint of the important role that such a category of sheaves can be expected to play in the local analysis at p of systems of Diophantine equations.The problem of solving equations is one of the most basic in mathematics , going back at least to the mathematicians of ancient Greece , such as Diophantus .
He studied the problem of solving equations in whole numbers ; such equations are now known as Diophantine equations .
Since the work of Descartes and Fermat , it has been understood that geometry provides a powerful tool for analyzing systems of equations , even if one is at first more interested in the equations from an arithmetic point of view .
For this reason , the development of powerful geometric tools is important for progress in the theory of Diophantine equations .
In this project , the investigator and his collaborator intend to develop such tools , by extending known techniques in the usual so-called archimedean geometry to the context of non-archimedean , or p-adic , geometry .
This geometry , which has a strong arithmetic flavor , provides a crucial geometric setting for the analysis of Diophantine equations , and these techniques are expected to yield several new developments in that analysis .
Such developments are important not only because they enrich what continues to be one of the center pieces of the mathematical tradition , but because the theory of Diophantine equations has deep interconnections with the theory of discrete processes , and especially with the theory of codes , so that progress in theory of Diophantine equations can be expected to yield progress in these fields .
ABSTRACTPROPOSAL NUMBER 0241152INSTITUTION University of Wisconsin , MadisonNSF PROGRAM ECONOMICSPRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR Hansen , BrucePROPOSAL TITLE Semiparametric Bootstrap Methods for Time SeriesThe bootstrap is a method of statistical inference is growing in popularity in applied econometrics due to its broad applicability and success in improving the accuracy of statistical inferences .
Bootstrap methods for time-series data are fundamentally different from those for random samples , as the bootstrap needs to replicate the dependence structure in the data .
The theory for flexible and practical bootstrap methods for time-series is sorely lacking .
A promising new bootstrap method for time-series is the Markov bootstrap ( MB ) , which is based on nonparametric estimation of the one-step-ahead conditional distribution function , and uses this estimator to construct the bootstrap distribution .
This research extends the MB method to time-series .
It investigates theoretical structure of the bootstrap , leading to concrete methods of implementation .
The research discusses how to construct the ergodic density of the MB and how to calculate bootstrap parameters and moments from the ergodic density .
This is essential for practical implementation of the MB , as these calculations are a necessary input in its application .
It also investigates the imposition of constrained on the ergodic density .
This is necessary for efficient inference , as a full nonparametric estimator does not make use of the available information about the model .
Furthermore , constraints must be imposed when the bootstrap is used to construct efficient confidence intervals.The accuracy of the MB will depend on the accuracy of the nonparametric estimator of the conditional distribution ; accordingly the research develops methods to improve estimation efficiency .
In this connection , new high order and low-bias kernel estimators explored .
The improvements in density estimation lead to improved rates of asymptotic refinements for bootstrap inference .
This improvement in density estimation requires theoretical investigation of the methods developed , which this research investigates .
The theory and methods developed by this research will have broad impacts on bootstrap applications and will be useful to applied economists in both academic and public sectors .
In the last three decades anthropologists have been among the most active researchers on the mammalian masticatory apparatus .
In addition to numerous comparative morphological studies , physical anthropologists have contributed significantly to the growing literature on in vivo masticatory function .
As a result , much of what is known about the mammalian cranial form is based on primate models .
These studies have revealed a number of interesting patterns regarding the evolution of primate craniofacial form .
In particular , research suggests that jaw-muscle function has played a significant role in the evolution of primate masticatory form .
During the early development of anthropoid primates ( i.e. , monkeys , apes and humans ) , the mandibular symphysis ( the joint between the two halves of the mandible ) fuses or becomes completely ossified .
However , like most mammals , the earliest true primates ( called strepsirrhines or prosimians ) retain the primitive condition of a highly mobile , unfused symphysis .
Interestingly , recent work shows that jaw adductor recruitment patterns during mastication differ between anthropoids and strepsirrhines with respect to the timing and magnitude of recruitment of transversely oriented force from the balancing-side ( i.e. , non-chewing side ) muscles .
Of particular interest is the activity of the balancing-side deep masseter muscle , which has a large transverse component to its force .
Compared to strepsirrhines , in anthropoids this muscle is recruited late relative to the other jaw adductors and the magnitude of force from this muscle is increased .
This pattern of deep masseter activity causes the two halves of the mandible to be pulled apart resulting in significant stress and strain in the symphysis .
Thus , there is evidence that jaw muscle firing patterns , symphyseal loading and the evolution of symphyseal fusion are linked in anthropoids .
The research on goats , alpacas and horses outlined in this study will contribute to the growing literature on the mammalian masticatory apparatus from an in vivo perspective .
As little is known about masticatory function in ungulates , particularly in alpacas and horses , the electromyographic , strain and kinematic data collected here will expand our understanding of cranial form and function in two additional mammalian orders .
More importantly , as alpacas and horses also have fused symphyses , this study will shed light on the evolution of symphyseal fusion in non-primates .
To this end , these data will aid in identifying convergent trends in the evolution of masticatory form in primates and ungulates .
Specifically , this research will clarify whether there are similar functional constraints on the symphysis in these animals despite differences in facial morphology .
In addition to the scientific contributions outlined above , the broader impacts of this research include the participation and graduate training of a minority and female Co-PI .
As much of the data collected in this study will be pertinent to future research , funding for this project will be integral in advancing the scientific career of this Co-PI .
This research exploits confidential Consumer Price Index ( CPI ) micro data , to study two issues -- -quality improvements for consumer goods and movements in firms ' marginal costs and price markups due to temporary product stockouts over market fluctuations .
The first part of the research studies the sensitivity of consumer price inflation and , quality growth , to treatment of the price increases associated with the introduction of new models of consumer durables .
The BLS ' resampling method can be exploited to gain information on how quantities sold change with model turnovers .
This information is then used to gauge how much of price increases for new goods should be attributed to quality improvements .
The second part of the research shows how information on temporary product stockouts , provide more direct information on how firms ' cost and prices behave over the market cycle than existing methods .
The stockout data are available for a much wider and more disaggregate set of goods than data on finished inventories .
The research shows how price markups can either be attributed to price stickiness or active price adjustments by sellers .
Results of this research have important policy implications .
The ability to break price increases between quality improvements and consumer price inflation is central to the goals of collecting information on prices .
The results can directly inform measurement of price increases used to judge changes in standards of living .
The results can yield suggestions for revisions of BLS methods or suggestions for additional statistics the BLS could make available .
The results of the research could also have an effect on how inflation should be measured .
This could affect the determination of cost living adjustments in wage contracts , social security payments , insurance , and ultimately the rate of inflation itself .
This research project will develop classical and Bayesian model-based statistical procedures with the primary goal of providing accurate estimates for small areas , representing local geographical regions and/or demographic subgroups of population .
Primary motivation for this research stems from the need for precise estimates of small areas which facilitates the federal government 's ability to initiate , formulate , and finally implement various socio-economic programs in order to address , among others , various public health issues , and income and poverty at local levels .
Usually , most population surveys are designed to achieve a high level of efficiency at the global level which leads to direct survey based estimates of smaller areas having large standard errors .
In many surveys ( e.g. , the Current Population Survey and the Current Employment Statistics Survey ) , data also are collected over time providing useful time series .
This project will exploit the time series nature of data and produce reliable estimates of small areas by borrowing strength from information across small areas as well as those available over time .
Explicit models will be developed incorporating linear as well as some recently developed nonlinear time series models .
In this context , the study will develop suitable statistical methodologies such as empirical best linear unbiased prediction , empirical Bayes and hierarchical Bayes estimation methods to produce reliable small area point and interval estimates useful in various federal and local government programs .
Markov chain Monte Carlo methods will be used in fitting Bayesian models .
Software based on SAS , FORTRAN , S-plus , and SCA will be developed for implementing methodologies developed in this project .
Furthermore , measure of accuracy of small area estimators will be assessed through second order approximations for the mean squared error of these estimators , even when the underlying distributions are unspecified , to check if the end results are robust against non-normality.The importance of this project lies in its relevance and direct tie to some of the on-going programs in the Census Bureau and the Bureau of Labor Statistics .
This research will lead to precise estimates of ( i ) poverty rates and median family income in the Small Area Income and Poverty Estimates program launched by the Census Bureau , ( ii ) U.S. civilian unemployment rates , and ( iii ) accurate employment counts for major industries in various regions .
This research will , on the one hand , advance statistical methodology for small area estimation and , on the other hand , apply various newly developed methodologies to statistical issues important to society .
This project develops practical tools for goodness-of-fit testing of models subject to random censoring models subject to random censoring with specific reference to duration models , and proposes a new method of analyzing non-nested conditional models.The literature of duration analysis is econometrics is large and growing .
While many flexible duration models have been developed in the literature to deal with important features of economic data , a large majority of empirical econometric studies employ parametric duration models .
It is , therefore important to have convenient specification techniques tailored for applied economists .
Many researchers use x2 tests that rely on arbitrary sample space splitting .
Also , residual analysis is often employed to conduct informal graphical analysis .
While these techniques are useful , general specification tests with sound statistical foundations are lacking .
This research develops a Kolmogorov-Smirnov type goodness-of-fit test for parametric conditional survival functions .
This test is easily modified to concentrates on model features of interest to the researcher .
An alternative specification test for parametric hazard functions based on martingale residuals is investigated .
It is common in applied econometrics to write a model conditional on some variables , with unspecified probability law of the conditioning variables .
Choosing between different types of conditional models is an important issue since it occurs frequently in applied econometrics .
If the two models are nested , many well-established methods are available .
There are , however , many situations not covered by these conventional methods .
Examples include ( 1 ) comparison of a conditional mean restriction model and a conditional median restriction model , ( 2 ) comparison of conditional quantile restriction models for two different quantiles , ( 3 ) comparison of two non-nested conditional mean restriction models , and ( 4 ) comparison of a parametric likelihood model and a conditional mean/median restriction model .
There are no generally acceptable methods of choosing between different models in these situations .
The research offers a likelihood-based measure of model fit that enables the researcher to compare a broad range of conditional models in a unified manner .
The key idea is to introduce likelihood for semiparametric models such as conditional mean restriction models and conditional quantile restriction models .
The measure is then used to develop a likelihood ratio test for model comparison .
Some practical issues for implementing the method are addressed .
The proposed research will yield software for scientists from many disciplines to easily use the methods developed in this research .
This investigation supports the completion of a large data set that makes it possible to conduct comparative analysis of provincial-level fiscal performance in federations around the world .
In recent years , central governments in federations have devolved profound functional responsibilities to provincial governments .
Concurrently , there has been renewed interest in federalism as a tool to solve issues of regional governance in settings as diverse as the European Union and South Africa .
At the same time , a number of researchers of Russia , Brazil , and Argentina have noted a common pathology whereby federations generate incentives for provincial politicians to over-fish the common pool of revenue , overspend in the expectation of national bailouts , and expend resources on the sustenance of political machines .
As a result , the comparative investigation of federalism has become a booming research program at the intersection of political science , economics , and policy studies as researchers attempt to answer questions about the driving forces behind government fiscal decisions and more broadly , the nature of accountability in multi-tiered systems of government.Intellectual Merit Current research on comparative federalism provides three justifications for the proposed research .
First , while some researchers have begun to investigate the institutions that underpin divergent economic outcomes across federations , they have treated federations en toto .
There is little recognition that provinces within federations vary dramatically in their incentives and behavior .
Second , because of this shortcoming the field has little ground on which to generalize about the conditions under which provincial governments are able to serve a positive mediating role between an increasingly global economy and local citizens , as asserted by many proponents of federalism .
Third , the vast majority of research on provincial fiscal policy focuses on the U.S. states , which are quite anomalous and provide a limited foundation for broader theorizing on provincial fiscal performance .
Even where researchers have begun to address inter-provincial variations in fiscal policy elsewhere , none of this research has been explicitly comparative .
Method In developing a comparative model of provincial fiscal behavior the researchers begin with four hypotheses culled from their own work and other recent theoretical and empirical literature ( 1 ) Provinces more dependent on fiscal transfers from the central government are more likely to run larger deficits .
( 2 ) Under some conditions shared partisanship across levels of government generates incentives for budgetary restraint on the part of provincial governments .
( 3 ) Provincial institutions that increase the number of checks and balances on fiscal decision-makers foster overspending .
( 4 ) Provinces that lack competitive provincial party systems are more likely to run larger deficits .
The investigators test whether these hypotheses are contingent on a variety of other characteristics of each country 's fiscal and political system .
This collaborative research project requires the collection of comparable political , fiscal , macroeconomic , and demographic data on each provincial government in 18 federal systems from 1978 through the late 1990s .
To date with support from their respective universities , the researchers have collected much of the relevant data for Argentina , Australia , Brazil , Canada , Germany , India , Mexico , Nigeria , Pakistan , Switzerland , the United States , and Venezuela .
The investigators seek support to complete the collection , coding , and organization of the remaining data , including the addition of Austria , Belgium , Malaysia , Russia , South Africa , and Spain .
Broad Impact The investigators will prepare a series of articles based on each of the research hypotheses above , eventually culminating in a book manuscript written for non-specialists .
The research has very important policy implications .
Redesigning the basic structure of fiscal federalism to improve fiscal discipline is at the top of the reform agenda in many federations.especially those that have suffered severe macroeconomic consequences of dysfunctional federalism .
Moreover , the data set will be made available on the internet to other researchers , and has the potential to become an often-used data resources in comparative politics and economics .
Examples of future uses include studies of political accountability in multi-tiered system , trends in inter-regional inequality , redistribution , and risk-sharing .
This project supports three summer conferences on political methodology .
The conferences constitute the 20th thru 22nd such meetings , which have been sponsored by NSF and university host institutions since 1986 .
Each meeting brings together approximately 100 faculty and graduate students .
There are several aims of the conferences .
First , they provide a forum for state of the art political methodology by allowing scholars to present the newest methods in the field for discussion and debate .
Second , they provide a forum where scholars in the field can debate and agree on best practices in different areas , which can then be disseminated to the field .
Third , they enhance graduate training by exposing them to the state of the art in a fast-moving field , rather than leaving them believing that what they have read in older articles is the best available technology for dealing with estimation and specification issues in political science .
Fourth , they allow junior faculty to receive state of the art training and advice on specific research problems .
Fifth , they provide mentors ship opportunities and networks for new scholars , whether they are graduate students or junior faculty .
The conferences are regarded widely as the best mechanisms for advancing methodology in political science .
Professors William E. Moerner and Martin M. Fejer of Stanford University are supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry and Atomic and Molecular Optics Programs to detect individual molecules using optical absorption and a Sagnac interferometer .
The idea of this Small Grant for Exploratory Research is to avoid the dependence on fluorescence , which is the basis of most single molecule spectroscopy at present .
Absorption would be a much more global approach , but is usually not as sensitive due to high background noise .
Sagnac interferometry directly measures the difference in optical phase shift experienced by beams traveling clockwise versus counterclockwise in a ring .
It is insensitive to excess phase amplitude and phase noise from the probing laser .
Saturation modulation of the molecular absorption with a secondary pulsed laser will be used to make the molecular absorption time varying .
By scanning the detection volume of the probe laser over the sample , microscopic images of ultrasmall features can be generated .
The project has the potential to impact several fields including trace detection , biophysics , materials science , quantum information and nanoscience .
In biological cells , for example , it would be possible to perform single molecule spectroscopy without dye labels , which potentially perturb the system , and without interference from spurious emitters .
This proposal request support to partially fund acquisition of an inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometer , which will supplement existing analytical capabilities at Rutgers University .
The new instrument will be primarily used for elemental rations ( e.g. , Mg/Ca and Sr/Ca ) in foraminifers and other biogenic carbonates in support of paleoceanographic research .
The new instrument will also be available to researchers and students in the Department of Geology and Department of Environmental Sciences at the university for projects that do not require the high-sensitivity and resolution of ICP-MS .
The instrument will serve as a training tool for students in the Earth and environmental sciences at both the undergraduate and graduate level .
1After several years of intense public debate and continuous regulatory restructuring , a new system for the control of agricultural biotechnology is currently taking shape in the European Union .
Based on the ability to make a distinction between genetically modified and conventional organisms in food commodities , this system aims to detect , identify and trace throughout the production chain all bio-engineered products entering the European market .
The commingling of conventional and genetically modified products , or any situation in which a single , clear-cut categorization can not be established , is defined in practice as a form of pollution , which must be discovered , controlled and ultimately prevented .
It is this policing of purity that this the focus on this dissertation research grant .
The dissertation tracks the controversies surrounding testing methodologies and the emergence of the principle of traceability for genetically modified organisms ( GMOs ) in the EU .
Given the transnational nature of the commodity flows , detection instruments and new regulatory provisions must operate beyond the strict geographical boundaries of the European Union .
The dissertation explores the development of this new control system in the context of EU-US relations and compares developments on both sides of the Atlantic .
Support is requested for additional fieldwork in Europe and the United States to complete the previous research .
Intellectually , the dissertation draws together a number of disciplines and research interests .
By analyzing the role of techno scientific instruments in the stabilization and/or disruption of transnational marketplaces and regulations , the research tries to bring Science and Technology Studies into fruitful contact with Economic Sociology and International Relations .
Finally , the dissertation hopes to make a contribution to the ongoing international policy debate regarding social control of agricultural biotechnology .
0241102SunDetermining protein interactions and functions are central in most proteomics projects .
This research focuses on the development of statistical and computational methods for the analysis of protein interaction data coming from high-throughput proteomic technologies such as yeast two-hybrid assays and mass spectrometry , and protein function data coming from databases of large-scale function annotations .
The research involves the study of the following two important problems in biology ( 1 ) identifying domain-domain interactions and protein-domain interactions from a large number of protein-protein interactions , and ( 2 ) assigning functions to unknown proteins from the knowledge of the functions of the annotated proteins , gene expression profiles , gene knockouts , protein sequence similarities , and protein-protein interactions .
These results obtained for yeast proteins can help us predict interactions and functions of humanproteins .
Training postdoctoral associates and graduate students from mathematics , statistics , computer science and molecular biology for proteomic research is an important part of the proposed research .
Based on the existing excellent education program in the field of computational biology and bioinformatics within the Center for Computational and Experimental Genomics ( CCEG ) in USC , the principal investigators plan to train future researchers through rigorous course work , seminars , discussion groups , and participation in the research project.In recent years , an increasing number of genomes of model organisms have been sequenced .
Using these genomic sequences , researchers have been able to make tremendous progress in the study of genomes .
Beyond these successes is the far more challenging and rewarding task of understanding proteomes .
In addition to genome sequences , many other databases , such as protein-protein physical interactions , genetic interactions , protein-DNA interactions , and gene expressions , have become available .
An important problem is how to combine information from the variety of different databases to understand the biological processes and biological functions of proteins .
The principal investigators will develop new statistical and computational methods for estimation and prediction of protein functions and for understanding important biological problems integrating several relevant large databases .
They will also train graduate students and postdoctoral associates in the field of computational biology and bioinformatics through their participation in research activities related to the proposed project .
The proposed project will generate a suite of computer algorithms related to protein-protein interactions and functional predictions .
Both the algorithms and results will be disseminated through the web .
The results from this study will be important for basic biological studies as well as for disease related studies from identifying protein functions .
The project will investigate the evolution of the Madden-Julian Oscillation ( MJO ) in the tropics from diagnostic analysis of observations and numerical modeling of the atmosphere and the coupled atmosphere-ocean system .
MJO is a key component of intra-seasonal variability , and plays a significant role in modulating the circulation and precipitation variability in the tropics and the extratropical Pacific/North American region .
MJO also influences the Asian-Australian summer monsoons .
Because of being sandwiched between two notable fluctuation time-scales -- the shorter time-scale weather and the longer time-scale seasonal-to-interannual variability -- MJO has not received the needed research attention up until recently .
Dr. Krishnamurti ( FSU ) will investigate the role of intra-frequency interactions in MJO genesis and evolution .
High-resolution numerical models of the atmosphere and the atmosphere-ocean system will be integrated to understand the spatio-temporal structure of the boundary layer fluxes of moisture , sensible heat , and momentum , in context of MJO variability .
The project is driven by the PI 's hypothesis that MJO time-scale flow components amplify from frequency interactions with a pair of synoptic time-scale ( 2-to-6 days ) circulation features , particularly in the planetary boundary layer .
The socio-economic impacts of Asian monsoon forecasts are felt by more than two billion people on the earth .
The passage of intra-seasonal waves seems to have substantial impact on the wet and dry spells of the monsoon .
This work has the potential to lead to real time prediction models of the MJO that can provide important guidance for sustained wet and dry spells of the monsoon .
Obsolescence is the major reason for depreciation of durables in markets with high rates of technological innovation .
Since much of the technological innovation is incorporated in new durables , modeling obsolescence of durable goods is vital for our understanding of the macroeconomy .
The dominant way of thinking about durability is in terms of exponential physical depreciation .
Obsolescence is different from physical depreciation in two important respects .
First , obsolescence is not a continuous process .
Development of new products is costly , which is why new goods are introduced only periodically .
For example , new car models appear every year , and new generations of Intel processors appear on average , every three years .
Thus periodic arrival of new models makes obsolescence discrete .
Second , with obsolescence , the service flow from the good is defined by its technological age .
Computers become obsolete because they can not run the latest software .
New car inventory is heavily discounted when the latest models arrive , suggesting that obsolescence is important in cars as well .
Since durables age even if never used , consumers who purchase a new model with a delay will enjoy a lower service flow .
Thus obsolescence gives consumers an incentive to coordinate their replacement decisions with new model introductions .
This way of thinking about obsolescence has not been fully explored before , yet it may have profound effects on the patterns of macroeconomic fluctuations .
This project studies a class of dynamic economies with durable goods subject to obsolescence .
It looks a general equilibrium models with competitive production of durable goods as well as models of durable good markets with strategic producers .
People often do not notice large changes to displays ranging from simple arrays of novel objects to complex , naturalistic motion pictures .
For example , observers sometimes fail to notice when the central actor in a motion picture is replaced by a different person during a cut to a different camera view .
Yet , the mechanisms underlying such change detection failures , or change blindness , are not well understood .
The primary goal of this proposal is to investigate the way in which our representations of the visual world influence our ability ( or inability ) to detect changes when viewers intentionally search for a change and when they do not anticipate a change .
Experimental tasks will be used both in and out of the laboratory thereby including conditions in which the representation of visual scenes is tested under more ecologically valid viewing conditions .
Variables will include the magnitude of the change , the initial viewing time , the delay between the original and changed display , and the complexity of the scene .
Another series of experiments will use both intentional and incidental tasks to explore the detection of categorical changes to in simple arrays of objects , photographs of natural scenes , and motion pictures .
A third series of experiments explores the possibility that we may form implicit or even explicit traces of changed objects even when we are unaware of the change itself .
These experiments investigate whether failures of change detection imply the lack of a representation or simply the inaccessibility of a representation to awareness .
Previous work on change blindness has assumed that the failure to detect a change implies the absence of a representation .
This inference has led to the conclusion that people retain little information about their visual world from one view to the next .
The studies in this proposal will explore the possibility that we represent more of our visual world than the existence of change blindness might imply .
By using both intentional and incidental tasks with displays ranging from simple arrays of objects to complex , dynamic scenes , these experiments will allow a more complete description of the nature of our visual representations from one view to the next and of visual short-term memory in general .
0241007 ReidThis project will study the circulation of the various layers lying beneath the Intermediate water .
This will follow from the results of the separate studies of the top-to-bottom circulation of the Atlantic , Pacific , and Indian oceans ( Reid , 1994 , 1997 , and in press ) .
Some preliminary work has been done on the overturning streamlines in the three oceans .
These deeper layers include the warm , saline , oxygen-rich and nutrient-poor waters formed in the northern North Atlantic and the less-saline and colder waters formed around Antarctica and in the Norwegian-Greenland Sea .
The shallowest of these layers is the North Atlantic Deep Water .
This very saline layer can be recognized throughout the Atlantic Ocean , along the Antarctic circumpolar current , and extending northward into the Indian and Pacific oceans .
The work will be done by examining the patterns of salinity , oxygen , and silica along isopycnal surfaces and on vertical sections .
The work should have a broad impact on studies of exchanges of water , heat , salt , and nutrients both vertically and among the three oceans .
It may provide a background against which the various climate studies can be examined .
One of the problems in studying ocean circulation is that it is possible to achieve models that balance heat transport and mass but do not have realistic flow patterns , and that results based upon geostrophic shear and tracers ( Reid 's work in the three oceans ) may have balanced total transport and realistic flow patterns but do not balance heat transport or circulation within layers .
This study will involve petrographic work , mineral chemical analysis ( major and trace elements ) , and Hf , Os , Sr , Pb , and Nd isotope study of mineral separates from spinel peridotite and garnet pyroxenite suite xenoliths from the post-erosional Honolulu Volcanics ( HV ) of Oahu .
The xenoliths come from three vents Salt Lake crater ( SLC ) is located on the rim of the Koolau volcano ; and Kaau and Pali vents are located close to its caldera .
The first order goal under this award is to infer xenolith origins using the combined isotopic and mineral chemical information .
The isotopic information and mineral thermobarometry on the xenoliths will allow the PIs to recognize the types of materials ( subducted crust and mantle or even lower mantle or transition zone materials ) that may have been brought up by the Hawaiian plume versus those that have a lithospheric origin .
The study will offer a direct insight into the isotopic variability of the shallow mantle beneath Oahu irrespective of their origin in the plume , the lithosphere , or as a mixed product of plume , lithosphere or asthenosphere- derived components .
Once these are identified , existing models on Hawaiian volcanism and lithospheric processes may be fine-tuned or better models may be proposed .
0241505 McCartneyThe Guiana Abyssal Gyre Experiment ( GAGE ) placed a moored array of current meters across the Guiana Basin , to measure the deep boundary current and to attempt to detect and quantify the hypothesized northward flow to its east .
As implemented the array was placed at 16 N for 27 months , and GAGE was enhanced through collaboration with a German .Meridional Overturning Variability Experiment .
( MOVE , based at U. Kiel ) .
Together the GAGE/MOVE program fielded 10 moorings with 72 current meters ( measuring temperatures and currents ) and 48 moored temperature/salinity instruments ( CTDs ) .
Considerable shipboard CTD measurements were made in the Guiana Basin in concert with mooring deployments and recoveries .
GAGE completed its fieldwork in May 2002 , with the exception of one GAGE mooring that failed to release and will be recovered in March of 2003 .
A first look at the results from the moored instruments , confirms the Gambia Abyssal Gyre hypothesis .
The deep western boundary current at 16 N is strong , estimated as 38 Sverdrups .
It has an unexpected two-regime structure in hydrography and in measured currents an onshore regime with strong southward flow near 1600 m , declining with depth to weak flow near 4000 m , and an offshore regime with strong flow near 3600-4600 m , declining in strength upwards and reversing to northward flow at 1600 m. The hypothesized northward recirculation is found in three regimes .
Immediately offshore and adjacent to the deep western boundary current the entire water column between 1600 m and 5400 m flows northward .
On the opposite side of the Guiana Basin adjacent to the Mid-Atlantic Ridge northward flow extends from the seafloor at 5400 m to 3600 m. All array instruments across the Basin at or below 3600 m , except one in the deep boundary current , exhibit northward flow .
This yields a surprisingly strong flow of what is called Antarctic Bottom Water , the coldest abyssal water .
Together these northward flow elements are preliminarily estimated as 19-23 Sverdrups , yielding a net transport of 15-19 Sverdrups , the expected amplitude for the cold limb of the overturning circulation .
The large GAGE/MOVE datasets will be worked up in collaboration with the MOVE scientists .
The measured currents and the measured hydrography will be combined to produce a complete quantitative characterization of deep flow at 16 N , including its variabilities in amplitude and structure .
With that as a powerful constraint , the full hydrographic dataset within the Guiana Basin will be reexamined to fully characterize the Guiana Abyssal Gyre and establish its role in the cold limb of the meridional overturning circulation .
A series of experiments that provide an understanding of how to control and optimize the extent of intermolecular hydrogen bonding that occurs in a multi-component polymer system are proposed .
DMR supported research has demonstrated that miscible blends containing a liquid crystalline polymer ( LCP ) and an amorphous polymer can be created by optimizing the extent of intermolecular hydrogen bonding between the two species .
The physical , engineering , and thermodynamic parameters of miscible LCP/amorphous matrix will be determined using small angle neutron scattering , its phase decomposition process monitored by time-resolved light scattering , and its engineering properties ( tensile , strength and flow properties ) measured by standard techniques .
The effect of LCP rigidity on the ability to form miscible blends will be examined to probe the universality of the ability to induce miscibility in LCP/amorphous polymer blends by optimizing intermolecular interactions .
The impact of controlling and optimizing the extent of intermolecular interactions on the properties of polymer nanocomposites will also be studied .
This will be accomplished by correlating the dispersion of single carbon nanotubes and layered silicates in a multi-component polymer mixture to the level of hydrogen bonding between the two components .
The completion of this set of experiments will furnish critical information that will define the limits of the optimization of hydrogen bonding between two components in a multicomponent polymer mixture to improve its dispersion and properties and define crucial parameters that will enable the design and production of robust multicomponent polymer systems , including true molecular composites and nanocomposites.The broader impacts of this work will come from the experience of Science teachers from a public High School when they spend four weeks in a university lab contributing to this project , obtaining hands-on laboratory experience and training in polymer demonstrations .
The teachers will utilize this experience in their classroom to introduce high school students to polymers and research .
This research will also be disseminated to a broad range of audiences by the development a public outreach webpage called The Fact of the Matter to educate the public regarding the contribution of materials to technological advances .
Further impact will result from the completion of neutron scattering experiments at the National Institute of Standards and Technology as well as Oak Ridge National Laboratory where the students participating in this project will acquire hands-on experience in a multi-user facility and develop the next-generation of neutron users to insure the continued health of these National facilities .
Finally , Current collaborations and interactions with industrial and/or government laboratories will expedite the transfer of the guidelines and fundamental understanding garnered from this project to commercial viable technologies that will benefit society .
The results of this project will provide critical guidelines that will ultimately enable the rational design of multicomponent polymer mixtures ( blends and nanocomposites ) that can be used to create materials with a broad range of targeted properties for an enormous range of technological applications including the next generation of extraordinary structural , flame resistant , and/or thermally stable materials .
The basic aims of this research project are to construct a data set for pooled cross section and time series analysis of social policy in 9 countries in Latin America , Iberia , the Caribbean , and the Antipodes from 1950-2000 , to collect information for a comparative historical analysis of the origins and transformations of social policy , and to bring quantitative and qualitative methodologies to systematically analyze options for and constraints on social policy relating to economic liberalization and transitions from authoritarian to democratic political systems .
The ultimate goal is to identify the economic and political constraints posed by these processes of transformation and the conditions that allow for building or maintaining strong social safety nets and effective social services .
The project will establish causal links between the level of economic development , consolidation of democratic institutions , and the nature and actions of social and political actors .
It will answer the question of where and why options for building or preserving effective social safety nets and social services existed , and where and why governments pursued these options or failed to do so .
The project will have several broader impacts Through conference presentations , scholarly articles , and a book , the project will contribute to a better understanding by policy makers in governments and in international development institutions of the ways in which open markets , political power distributions , and political institutions shape options for creative policy design and political coalition building in support of effective social policies .
The project will also contribute to education and training of graduate students by involving them as research assistants and co-authors .
Finally , the data set will be made publicly available and will facilitate research on a number of questions in comparative political economy and social policy .
Globalization 's onset inspired predictions about convergence of capitalist economies to American-style liberalism .
Even dissenters agreed on liberalism 's comparative advantages fewer regulations , less particularistic policy making , and swift asset redeployment .
Ironically , however , this consensus has coincided with striking departures from laissez-faire in so-called liberal states .
Neither the convergence school nor its critics can explain when and why the liberal market economies ( LMEs ) in the UK , the US , and Canada stray from laissez-faire .
This Doctoral Dissertation Research Support project posits that political institutions explain LMEs departures from liberalism and differences among the three countries policies .
First , party discipline , combined with ideology , conditions politicians .
Incentives to adopt universalistic policies versus particularistic policies to benefit specific sectors .
Where party discipline is weak , particularism is greater than where it is strong .
Second , federalism leads to inter-state bids for mobile industries capable of making credible exit threats .
This research project employs evidence from interviews , quantitative analyses , and case studies , to investigate links between political institutions and industry policymaking .
National Science Foundation support improves this dissertation by funding interviews with actors and policymakers in three U.S industries steel , autos , and pharmaceuticals .
Data will be collected on firm 's policy preferences ; lobbying and campaign contributions ; and taxation , research and development , industry location , and industry consolidation policies .
This research contributes to the debate about globalization and domestic policy by systematically testing the relationship between political institutions and policy particularism .
This project addresses a central question in the comparative study of democratic institutions How do coalition governments , which are composed of multiple parties with often conflicting ideological goals , manage to make policy ?
Surprisingly , relatively few studies have examined this issue in a systematic cross-national fashion .
Instead , most research on multiparty government has focused on the formation and termination of coalitions , largely neglecting the policymaking process between these events .
In this project , the principal investigators address this question by examining lawmaking in two European parliamentary democracies .
Specifically , the investigators propose to collect primary data on the committee and floor stages of the legislative process in Germany and the Netherlands .
The theoretical model in the project focuses on a central principal-agent problem that coalition cabinets must solve if they are to govern successfully .
Because expertise is needed to plan and implement public policy , governments in parliamentary democracies must delegate important policymaking powers to individual ministers who have control over relevant issue areas .
In particular , cabinet ministers enjoy considerable autonomy in drafting government legislation within their jurisdiction .
For coalition governments , such delegation creates the risk that ministers will use their autonomy to bias policy in favor of their own parties without adequately taking into account the interests of their coalition partners .
The incentive to do so grows particularly strong on issues that greatly divide coalition members .
The argument proposed here is that parliamentary oversight provides a key institutional mechanism that allows coalition parties to deal with this problem .
While it is difficult to police ministers from within the cabinet , coalition members can make use of the legislative process to scrutinize and amend legislation introduced by hostile ministers .
The researchers contend that this mechanism is particularly important where the coalition is internally divided .
If correct , this argument challenges the common perception that parliaments in Western Europe are largely irrelevant institutions .
Legislatures may play a crucial role as an intra-coalition conflict management tool that allows parties with divergent preferences to govern jointly .
An empirical evaluation of this theory requires detailed data on the treatment of government bills in the legislative process .
In particular , such an evaluation requires information on the extent to which coalition parties make use of the legislative process to scrutinize and amend policy proposals drafted by individual ministers .
With support from their home institutions , the principal investigators have already collected relevant data on nearly three hundred government bills introduced in the Netherlands and Germany between 1982 and 1994 .
The existing dataset provides information on the ideological stance of coalition parties on the issues addressed by these bills as well as the length of delay these bills encounter in the legislative process .
A preliminary analysis of the data has yielded results that are consistent with the theory .
The financial support requested in this proposal enables the principal investigators to expand this dataset substantially and conduct a more direct test of the theory .
The expanded dataset will consist of information on the exercise of parliamentary oversight as measured by changes made to government bills by coalition parties during the committee and floor stages of the legislative process.The proposed project has theoretical and empirical significance for scholars engaged in comparative legislative research .
Most importantly , the project challenges the common assumption that legislatures in parliamentary systems are unimportant institutions .
By suggesting that parliaments are significant primarily as mechanisms for managing intra-coalition conflict , the study encourages renewed theoretical and empirical efforts in understanding the role of legislatures .
In addition , the project makes available cross-national legislative data consisting of detailed information on government bills in two major European countries .
Currently , no comparable dataset on government bills and the legislative process is available to the scholarly community .
This is a collaborative study with German scientists from GEOMAR , as part of the MEGAPRINT expedition that took place aboard the R/V Sonne during 2001 .
The field program sampled critical , unmapped sections of the eastern Galapagos Spreading Center ( GSC ) and portions of young seafloor between the archipelago and the spreading center .
Elements of the program included multi-beam seafloor mapping , shipboard gravity and magnetic surveys , and sampling of lavas by dredging at ~15 km spacing along the eastern GSC , and at numerous off-axis seamounts and volcanic ridges .
Guided by ~100 major element glass analyses already completed , the PIs propose an analytical program that will determine trace element contents , He , Pb , Nd , Sr and Hf isotope compositions , volatile ( CO2 , H2O , Cl , F and S ) contents and 40Ar-39Ar radiometric ages of a representative suite of these submarine glasses and rocks .
Geophysical data from German colleagues will provide additional constraints on age , structure , thickness and tectonics of the crust and lithosphere .
ABSTRACTOCE-0241662Photosynthetic uptake of CO2 by oceanic phytoplankton and the export of the resulting organic carbon to the deep sea comprise a biological pump ( Volk and Hoffert , 1985 ) , capable of extracting globally significant amounts of CO2 from the atmosphere .
As a consequence , it is important from the perspective of the global carbon cycle to understand both the present efficiency and the main controlling mechanisms of this important carbon pathway .
In the open ocean the biological pump is driven by new production of organic matter ( production supported by externally supplied nutrients ) and export of that organic matter to depth .
Many methods have been employed to estimate new production , with varying degrees of agreement .
In the Sargasso Sea , for example , geochemical estimates of new production largely exclude the winter mixing period ( because their fundamental assumption are valid only during stratified periods ) .
Biological methods suggest that the pre-stratification period can be as important , in terms of new production , as the remainder of the year .
Those biological estimates are poorly constrained and based on sparse data .
Because of the enormous spatial extent of subtropical gyres similar to the Sargasso Sea , uncertainty in the rate of new production and organic matter export in those systems leads to large uncertainty in biologically-driven carbon fluxes at the global-scale .
Recent data suggest that in the Sargasso Sea , the passage of weather fronts leads to increased new production during the winter mixing period .
Some oceanographers believe that these events lead to enhanced nitrate input , followed by a rapid biological response and accumulation of biomass , and an equally rapid export of that biomass to depth .
In this project , researchers at the Bermuda Biological Station for Research carry out a process-oriented study of new production and its control during the period before formation of the seasonal thermocline in the BATS/BTM/OFP region near Bermuda .
Researchers from Oregon State University , Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution , and the University of South Carolina will also participate in some aspects of the study .
This sea-going effort will be conducted during two 30-day cruises ( one in 2004 and one in 2005 ) during the winter mixing period when the passage of these fronts is most common and when few data are available to constrain new production estimates .
It will be crucial for this study to sample from a fully weather-capable research vessel , which can stay out and continue operations through most winter storms .
The team will use direct measurements of nitrate entrainment , nitrate uptake , phytoplankton community structure change , and dissolved and particulate organic matter export to elucidate the linkages between new production and export production as well as determine the main biological responses to short-term physical forcing .
Particular emphasis will be placed on biogeochemically critical phytoplankton groups such as diatoms and coccolithophorids , which can exploit transiently favorable conditions of the kind hypothesized to occur in late winter/early spring and which play a disproportionately large role in organic-matter export in many systems.An understanding of ocean function is no longer important just to practicing ocean scientists .
This project will provide information critical for biogeochemical modelers seeking to constrain future predictions of changes in the oceanic biological pump , and will also provide information of interest to students , teachers and the general public .
If in fact a significant , and previously unmeasured , amount of new production occurs in subtropical gyres during the winter mixing period , then biological processes in the central ocean gyres play a greater role in the global carbon cycle including regulation of atmospheric carbon dioxide than we recognize at present .
Viruses are the most abundant biological agents in marine plankton and have a tremendous potential impact on biological oceanographic processes , including material & energy flow as well as plankton diversity .
New molecular methods to investigate diversity of host bacteria and viruses permit researchers to begin unraveling the relationships between virus and host diversity in marine plankton , and how it may affect overall rate processes .
These molecular techniques include molecular fingerprinting of 16S rRNA and other genes for bacterial hosts , and pulsed field gel electrophoresis for virus communities .
This project will use such approaches , along with other techniques , to study natural and experimental marine microbial systems and address basic hypotheses on the relationships between bacterial and viral communities .
Study sites will include the Wrigley Time Series Site ( WTSS ) midway between Los Angeles and Catalina Island , and also richer coastal waters near Los Angeles and Catalina Island .
Part of the project is continuation of an existing monthly time series at WTSS of virus abundance and virus community composition at 4 depths to 500 m , to augment other microbiological and oceanographic observations being made at that location with other financial support .
In addition to the general time series databasing component which continues to provide valuable microbial community data in its own right , we will use this sampling to test hypotheses about viral control of specific common groups of marine bacteria , initially targeting the SAR 11 cluster , cyanobacteria , and marine alpha proteobacteria .
Other focused experiments will also target these groups .
SAR 11 and cyanobacteria are good targets because ( a ) they are ubiquitous and typically each makes up 5-30 % of the bacteria ( b ) their members are very closely related to each other worldwide , yet distant from other known groups ( c ) an extensive database of 16S rRNA and 16S-23S intergenic spacer sequences for both groups is published ( and also other genes in cyanobacteria ) , facilitating investigation of strain composition at high resolution without the need to culture the organisms ( d ) both groups are culturable , with the SAR11 group just recently isolated in dilution culture , with multiple strains reported .
Short-term , more frequent sampling and experimental mesocosms will be used to examine community and specific subgroup dynamics on the generation time scale .
The project has the added value of taking advantage of a unique time series of microbial diversity at an easily accessible marine site , suitable for further analysis such testing hypotheses relating diversity and stability in marine microbes .
Samples ( e.g .
preserved virus concentrates , microbial DNA ) will also be available for retrospective analysis .
Exploratory investigation of virus diversity and activity in sediments is also included as a minor component .
Broader impacts of this project include a training and education component with participation of underrepresented groups , enhancement of the research and education infrastructure , and planned broad dissemination of the results .
This grant explores how alloying additions and crystal structure influence magnetostriction in Fe and Fe-Ga based alloys .
The influences of selected alloying elements with no d-shell electrons , with filled d-shells , and with partially filled d-shells are examined using single crystals and directionally solidified polycrystalline alloys .
The influence of crystal structure is examined using a Fe-27.5 a % Ga alloy that can exist in a-ordered ( bcc ) , DO19-ordered ( hexagonal ) , L12-ordered ( fcc ) , and disordered-bcc structures .
Another principal goal of this work is to examine a low cost thermomechanical processing approach to produce [ 001 ] textured Fe-Ga based polycrystalline alloys at low cost .
The processing approach involves cold/warm deformation and recrystallization .
An assessment of the influence of the amount of different process parameters on the nature of texture obtained in selected Fe-Ga alloys , and the mechanisms controlling the evolution of texture will be made.The processing conditions that result in [ 001 ] texture are identified through a study of texture evolution during processing using Orientation Imaging Microscopy ( OIM ) in an SEM .
The grant will result in an improved understanding of magnetostriction in Fe based alloys , and low cost and highly magnetostrictive alloys for use in sensor and actuator applications .
The grant will also enhance the graduate and undergraduate educational , training , and recruitment activities .
As micro-electronic and micro-computing advances proliferate to a large class of information technology appliances , there are two trends dominating the current generation of applications and capabilities .
The first trend is increasing use of software in a large number of appliances that imparts intelligent processing and decision making to manage device response and its interaction with the user and the environment .
The second trend is increased networking of this embedded intelligence ( also called ambient intelligence in Europe ) due to advances in communication and on-chip networking capabilities .
Computing in such systems is increasingly application-oriented and must be responsive to the environment in which the device will be placed from hand-held , personal spaces to the human body .
This portability of embedded computing places extreme demands on the ability of the system architectures to tolerate varying energy source conditions , communication channel conditions , network conditions , etc .
Yet , there is also an increasing need for the application to be predictable on various measures including performance , energy and power consumption and other QoS ( Quality of Service ) properties .
System availability and performance reliability are also extremely important as these systems interact with real world processes and their unavailability may lead to adverse or even disastrous consequences .
This research addresses some of the important challenges in the management of the power , energy and performance of embedded computing and networked devices in ways that allows us to develop close bounds on the quality of results achieved .
This project is developing fundamental technical advances in the state of the art in dynamic power management ( DPM ) ( at both hardware and software levels ) , and other types of QoS predictability by employing techniques from formal verification , probabilistic modeling and model checking , and cooperative game theory .
The educational part of this project aims at building embedded systems engineering as a sub-discipline of Computer Engineering at Virginia Tech , as well as on popularizing the research results through demonstration of the techniques to more tangible engineering examples .
For example , the tools developed may be used for high-way traffic modeling , analysis and controller synthesis for traffic maintenance .
Such demonstrations ( with appropriate animation ) are being developed to illustrate the power of formal and mathematical modeling of complex systems to K12 level students and attract them to engineering .
In this project techniques for analysis of strategies and protocols employed in embedded computing systems for resource management are being investigated .
The tools being developed will allow formal validation of probabilistic guarantees on performance , energy expenditure and QoS .
The project also applies existing tools ( whenever possible ) for formal analysis to achieve the goals of predictability of such measures .
In particular , the following types of questions are being dealt with .
( a ) How to analyze and compare power/performance characteristics of multiple competing strategies without having to resort to expensive simulation based methods ?
( b ) How to formally verify probabilistically quantified guarantees on the measures of interest ?
( c ) How to guide designers of embedded system in choosing between alternative possible strategies to achieve some performance goals ?
( d ) How to formally analyze network protocols , using energy models of the protocols to obtain expected bounds on required buffer size , expected retransmission rate , given a power budget ?
( e ) How to formally analyze and validate other QoS optimizations of implemented strategies and protocols , based on fault models , which are probabilistically specified ; ( f ) How to apply formal techniques for probabilistic analysis in the area of Game theory , so as to have generic techniques applicable in many areas of embedded systems ?
( g ) How to apply these techniques to other areas of engineering , such as modeling traffic patterns on roadways , make such interesting applications available to young students in K12 institutes to inspire them in engineering education ?
0237016SacksStomata contain pores that regulate gas exchange through the shoot epidermis .
The control of stomatal formation is central to leaf development and plant productivity .
Stomata are produced and patterned via asymmetric divisions .
TOO MANY MOUTHS ( TMM ) is a leucine-rich repeat receptor-like protein that regulates stomatal number and distribution .
TMM is expressed in a population of stem cells during leaf development .
It appears to control the balance between cell proliferation and differentiation in a cell-type- and organ-specific manner .
TMM is also likely to receive spatial cues used to orient the plane of asymmetric division so that stomata do not form adjacent to each other .
Thus TMM probably functions at multiple levels of a developmental hierarchy .
Downstream signaling is likely to require association with other proteins because TMM lacks a cytoplasmic domain .
The TMM protein complex will be analyzed biochemically , and the identity and function of interacting proteins will be characterized .
The relationship between TMM and another gene with overlapping functions will be defined at the levels of genetics , expression , biochemistry , and development .
The expression pattern of TMM will be evaluated in the context of leaf and shoot development .
Asymmetric divisions will be studied to determine whether TMM orients an axis of polarity and how it controls the division plane .
This work addresses fundamental questions in plant development such as how a receptor regulates the plane and frequency of asymmetric division , and how cell position and communication contribute to pattern formation .
Because other plants , including crops , have TMM-like genes , this work should provide a context for a wider understanding stomatal development and of the evolution of a key feature of land plants .
The objective of this CAREER project is to develop general models for b-sheet formation and stabilization .
Several all-b-sheet proteins are unusually thermostable , and many function in harsh extracellular environments where unusually high stability is required for activity .
Many of these proteins have simple structural topologies ( for example , the parallel b-helix ) , which , together with their thermostability , make them attractive subjects for use as 'molecular scaffolds ' for designing new functionalities .
However , these proteins have an Achilles ' heel while the native protein may be thermostable , the folding intermediates are often quite thermolabile , and prone to aggregation .
A prerequisite for adapting these proteins for alternative functions is to understand how they operate .
Yet little is known about the details of b-sheet formation , particularly parallel b-sheet formation .
This project will use biochemical and biophysical approaches such as fluorescence spectroscopy , protease sensitivity , and changes in molecular radius to examine the conformations of folding intermediates for two all-b-sheet proteins with very stable yet difficult-to-form native states .
This work will uncover the features of b-sheet folding intermediates that ( 1 ) promote correct folding to the native structure , and ( 2 ) suppress the off-pathway aggregation reaction .
The results of these studies will have broad application to the design of correctly folded b-sheet proteins for biotechnological purposes.The education goals of this project focus on introducing students at all levels to the interdisciplinary approaches of modern scientific research and development .
The specific objectives include updating the undergraduate curriculum to incorporate a new upper-level undergraduate elective in protein biophysics , and a new general chemistry course for first year students , focused on the interdisciplinary approaches of modern scientific discovery .
Current efforts to recruit female and minority researchers will be continued and expanded .
This project responds to a request to manage the NSF 2003 Nanomanufacturing and Processing Workshop , to be held January 5-6 , 2003 in Birmingham , AL .
Basic discoveries and innovations in manufacturing methods and processes will be needed to achieve the full impact of nanotechnogy .
To move forward on this multidisciplinary issue of national importance , fifteen experts in nanomanufacturing will be invited for this 1.5 day workshop .
These experts will provide input on research needs for the future .
The workshop will be held immediately before the 2003 NSF Design , Service , and Manufacturing Grantees and Research Conference , so in addition to reporting the workshop results by publications , they will be immediately reported to the research community at the conference .
Basic discoveries and innovations in manufacturing methods and processes will be needed to achieve the full impact of nano-technology .
The multi-disciplinary experts from industry , small business and academia gathered for this workshop will advise NSF on research needs for the future .
Not Available Today , high-performance clusters of shared-memory multiprocessors ( SMPs ) are employed to cope with large data sets for scientificapplications .
On these SMPs , hybrid programming models combingmessage passing and shared memory are often less efficient than puremessage passing although the former fits SMP architectures moreclosely.The objective of this work is to determine the sources ofinefficiencies in utilizing memory hierarchies of SMPs and to optimizememory behavior .
The novelty lies in the reliance ondynamic binary rewriting , i.e. , performance analysis and tuning areperformed on the application while it executes.The technical challenges are to1 ) develop a framework for dynamic binary rewriting,2 ) determine coherence traffic resulting in misses fornon-deterministic orders of executions in the presence of parallelism,3 ) identify memory bottlenecks,4 ) determine data dependencies between data references forhot-spots for binaries,5 ) study the potential for memory-improving program transformationson the executing binary and6 ) evaluate the merits of optimizations for large-scale benchmarksamong others.The key intellectual merit is in providing additional , dynamicoptimizations for long-running applications .
The broader impact ofthis work lies in its contribution to counter the increasing gapbetween processor and main memory speeds by fullyexploiting software optimizations .
Every proliferating cell must duplicate its genetic information accurately and only once per cell cycle .
Any process that falls short of or exceeds these limits results in cell death or abnormal proliferation .
The long-term goal of this research program is to understand the mechanisms governing DNA replication in eukarya , and this research project will focus specifically on the origin of replication , a specific location on the chromosome where replication initiates .
Whereas DNA replication has been well characterized in bacteria , viruses and bacteriophages , many aspects of the process in eukarya , particularly in the initiation phase , are still unknown .
The complex eukaryotic cell cycle entails numerous regulatory signals and factors from the first step of origin recognition to the final step of cell division , making it difficult to study individual components and events .
An organism that may help to circumvent some of the complexity of eukaryotic replication is a prokaryote with eukaryotic-like replication processes , the archaeon Methanothermobacter thermautotrophicus ( Mth ) .
Archaeal DNA replication appears to be more similar to the eukaryal rather than the bacterial process .
However , the archaeal DNA replication apparatus appears to require fewer proteins and complexes .
Thus , archaea may provide a good model system for understanding the enzymology of eukaryotic replication .
The research will focus on the mechanisms of the initiation of DNA replication in Mth.Both wild-type and mutant recombinant proteins will be used in in vitro experiments designed to1 ) isolate and identify the origin binding proteins,2 ) understand how the origin is recognized and bound by the initiation proteins ; and 3 ) identify the functional motifs in the archaeal origin .
A long-term goal is to develop an in vitro replication system for Mth ; the information gained from these biochemical studies will be directly applicable to such a system .
0237258 Valero-Cuevas This five-year CAREER Development project establishes the foundation for interdisciplinary education and research in neuromuscular biomechanics at Cornell University .
The project develops two objectives ( a ) uncover the neuromuscular biomechanics of dexterous manipulation ; and ( b ) integrate engineering and neuroscience into an interdisciplinary educational network .
Dexterity is defined in the engineering sense of being able to perform stable dynamic manipulation .
Research objectives focus on using engineering science to rigorously characterize dexterous manipulation , and to distinguish between the relative contributions of passive and active biological elements of the hand to stabilize manipulation .
To achieve these goals , an integrative and interdisciplinary approach will combine nonlinear dynamics , robotics , biomechanics , and neurophysiology in a unique manner .
Three specific investigations are proposed ( 1 ) Analyze human dexterous manipulation experimentally using bifurcation theory .
( 2 ) Characterize brain and muscle activity during dexterous manipulation using functional MRI and electromyography .
And , ( 3 ) use a computer biomechanical model of a multi-digit hand to predict the limits of dexterity with and without neural activity , and test these limits using a robotic manipulator .
Understanding the neuromuscular biomechanics of dexterous manipulation in humans will revolutionize understanding of biological motor function , aid in the diagnosis and treatment of hand impairment , and greatly expand the capabilities of robotic hands .
The PI 's previous work established a theoretical , computer modeling , and experimental foundation for the neuromuscular biomechanics of static force production of individual digits .
This foundation will be expanded ( 1 ) by using nonlinear dynamical analysis ( to enable the use of reduced order models ) to study the transitions from dynamical stability to instability in this complex system and ( 2 ) by integrating cerebral , muscular and biomechanical measurements in the context of a comprehensive computer model of multi-digit manipulation .
The understanding gained from studying the human hand will be instrumental to improving dexterous manipulation in humans ( clinical applications ) and machines ( robotic manipulators ) .
The educational objective is to develop an interdisciplinary educational network that integrates engineering and neuroscience , which will have a broad impact on bioengineering education .
The educational methodology will promote discovery in neuromuscular biomechanics among a diverse population spanning from high school students to practicing researchers and clinicians .
Education and research will be integrated by 1 ) Creating an undergraduate and graduate educational program in neuromuscular biomechanics to improve and broaden the engineering curriculum , 2 ) Actively promoting opportunities for high school and undergraduate students from underrepresented groups to become involved in neuromuscular biomechanics research and 3 ) advocating the importance of engineering concepts and methods to researchers and clinicians in neuroscience , motor control , hand therapy , and hand surgery .
The overall objectives of this project are to ( 1 ) create more effective pedagogical agents by incorporating novel methods of figure animation into them , and ( 2 ) rigorously assess the performance of these agents in K-12 classrooms .
The research is divided into two components .
The first component will develop and integrate a system for stylistically variable low-level motion specification , both full-bodied and facial , into the high-level cognitive components of a pedagogical agent .
The particular pedagogical agent that will serve as the research infrastructure is called a `` teachable agent .
'' The second component of the research will deploy the system in K-12 classrooms as each stage is developed , and conduct controlled multi-method studies to assess the influence of the animated agent on learning-related outcomes .
The significance of the proposed work is its potential to improve the education of children , particularly in the domain of science .
Additionally , controlled studies on the value of animated pedagogical agents in the area of K-12 education are rare .
These studies should further the scientific understanding of the componentsof compelling animation , and result in a broader understanding of the proper role of graphics and animation in learning systems .
An interdisciplinary course in computer science and education is being co-developed for the web and will be co-taught with faculty from the field of education .
Finally , by introducing education as an important application of graphics and animation , the plan is to broaden the appeal of computer science to those who are traditionally under-represented .
In established democracies , the process by which citizen preferences are translated into government policy is supposed to follow a similar pattern .
Citizens express their preferences in elections .
This expression of preferences determines the composition of the parliament and the government .
The government makes policy decisions .
Voters react to the policies and their implementation by expressing their preferences through votes , and the cycle continues .
At each stage of this process , different types of political institutions , such as electoral systems , regime types , the modes of coalition bargaining , and the modes of public policy making , work either to reinforce or to distort the preferences or ideological orientations in the previous stage .
When good indicators of public opinion , parliament ideology , government ideology , and government policy are available , the democratic performance of political systems can be measured by the congruence between citizen 's policy preferences and government policies .
Many scholars have attempted to assess democratic performance under different political institutions .
Their work has left room for improvement , however , since the measures of ideology they employed were available only for a limited number of countries and/or time periods .
Further , determining the democratic performance of political institutions necessarily entails cross-national comparisons ( since different countries have different institutions ) and cross-time comparisons ( since countries may adopt new institutions ) .
It is questionable whether the measures employed by previous studies allow meaningful cross-national and cross-time comparisons .
In this investigation , the researchers assess democratic performance of 25 Western democracies measures of ideology that allow valid cross-national and cross-time comparisons and that are consistently available for more countries and/or longer time periods than the existing measures .
They start by utilizing a continuous measure of party ideology for 25 Western democracies developed earlier and based on party manifestos data compiled by the Manifesto Research Group .
The researchers have already created a yearly series of voter ideology scores for these countries by combining election results with the corresponding measures of party ideology .
They have also built a continuous measure of government ideology for 17 countries by taking a weighted average of party ideology scores , where the weights are the proportion of total cabinet portfolios held by each party .
They continue this research program by collecting data for the number of parliamentary seats for each party in each country in the sample , for the postwar period through the late 90 's .
This allows the investigators to build a continuous measure of parliament ideology for Western democracies by taking a weighted average of party ideology scores , where the weights are the proportion of total parliamentary seats held by each party .
They also complete their measure of government ideology by collecting cabinet portfolio data for eight countries for which government ideology scores have not yet been calculated .
The data set will advance the broader research goal -- uncovering the impacts of different political institutions on democratic performance by utilizing measures of ideology and widely available data on policy outcomes and institutional features in Western democracies .
This research adds to the existing knowledge about the political institutions that best translate people 's preferences into government policy for example , large or small electoral districts , proportional representation or single-member plurality electoral rules , direct or indirect elections ( such as electoral college system ) , unicameral or bicameral legislatures , parliamentary or presidential systems , unitary or federal systems , etc .
These data will be valuable to political scientists and policy makers alike .
In this CAREER project funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division , Polenova will study vanadium-containing enzymes and associated model compounds using a variety of NMR techniques .
The NMR experiments will be interpreted using density matrix simulations of spectra , and the electric quadrupole gradients for the vanadium will be interpreted using parameterized electronic structure calculations .
These methods will be applied to haloperoxidases as well as to studies of vanadyl model compounds with known crystal structure.Metal ions serve a number of purposes in proteins , including catalytic , storage , and structural functions .
Many of the mechanistic aspects behind these functions are not well understood .
The application of solid-state NMR to metal sites in proteins is an important application .
In this work Polenova is able to gather data about metal complexes with high sensitivity and high resolution .
These data should have an impact on understanding biologically relevant systems as well as helping advance the state of knowledge at the interface between spectroscopy , bioinorganic chemistry , and metallobiochemistry .
The results have the potential to help develop more environmentally friendly methods of catalysis .
In her research program Polenova involves not only graduate and undergraduate students , but she also performs outreach to high school students .
In addition , her education activities encourage underrepresented groups to pursue careers in science .
This proposal requests support for an international conference on seismogenic zone studies that are being done under the auspices of the NSF MARGINS program .
The last workshop on this topic was held in 1997 .
Since that time a number of studies have been conducted that have developed new and important information on the factors that influence the distribution , timing , magnitude , and mechanisms for earthquakes .
The purpose of the workshop will be to foster exchange of information and results between researchers and students and provide a venue for developing plans for cross-disciplinary work in the future .
Computational comparison of biosequences is fundamental to modern biology .
It is the fastest , most widely used technology to annotate the functional elements of a newly sequenced genome .
Algorithms for comparison must address the rapid increase in the size of sequence databases and the need for more sensitive tools of multiple alignments , as well as the need to compare inferred feature models .
Enhancing the pattern-matching algorithms that form the heart of fast comparison tools is the focus of this research .
A research framework for rational pattern design and a technique for combining pattern matching with substitution score matrices will be incorporated .
Pattern matching generalizes the word-matching heuristics of alignment algorithms .
The choice of pattern can impact the search speed and sensitivity .
The improved search patterns will be specialized to particular feature types , such as coding sequence , or to groups of organisms .
Collaborations with popular search tool developers are established and will help integrate the new methods .
Research training involves students at many levels and will also form the basis of cross-disciplinary student exchanges .
Not Available Self-assembly is the process by which simple objects spontaneously assemble into complexes .
It is expected to ultimately become an important technology at the level of atoms andmolecules .
The development of researches in programmableself-assembly is reaching the stage that we haveto understand it mathematically in orderto take full advantage of this new tool.The goal of this research is to study the computational aspects of self-assembly .
The objectives of this project includes ( 1 ) Solving concrete problems in the Tile Assembly Model , including but not limited tofinding an approximation algorithm for the MinimumTile Set Problem ( MTSP ) and characterizing the shape languages .
( 2 ) Exploring different modelings of self-assembly , whichwill give a more accurate abstraction of the experimental results and will reflect the massive parallelism in molecular/DNA computing .
( 3 ) Studying the connections between the algorithmic self-assembly and the classical theoryof computation , especially the communication theoryand the resource-bounded Kolmogorov complexity.This CAREER project will integrate teaching activity into the research of self-assembly.The PI will offer graduate level courses in molecular computing and closely-related fields such as bioinformatics , and introduce the researchto undergraduate and graduate students in general theory courses.This project will adopt the active learning techniques in teaching.It is expected that the project will contribute to understandingthe engineering power of self-assembly , and to disseminatingthe current research information to students as well .
The Black Sea is the largest known oxygen-depleted , sulfide-enriched basin on Earth .
Although hydrogen sulfide is usually toxic , oxygen-depleted marine waters rich in sulfide can have surprisingly high densities of eukaryotic microorganisms ( e.g. , foraminiferans ) .
This modest NSF award will support work on a single research collecting cruise in the southwestern Black Sea to explore microbial communities at points where the sediment/water interface intersects with the disappearance of oxygen in the water column .
Populations of eukaryotic microbes will be quantified and characterized , as well as examined for the presence of symbiotic bacteria .
Environmental conditions will be determined by using chemical data that will be collected from the same samples ( as part of other NSF projects , G. Luther , University of Delaware ) .
Results will provide a view of what may be a very unique bottom-dwelling Black Sea microbial community , with many organisms previously unknown to science , thereby providing a foundation for future , more multidisciplinary detailed studies in the area .
Oxygen depletion caused by human activities is becoming more widespread in marine waters .
Characterizing microbial consortia in the Black Sea may lead to a better understanding of the role of these communities in other waters where the process is less desirable , and could suggest new remedies .
Other broader impacts of this project include the involvement of an undergraduate student from an institution in an EPSCoR state , and interaction between the PI and possible foreign collaborators .
Results will be integrated into coursework taught in future classes at the University of South Carolina .
ABSTRACT0237727Aylin YenerPennsylvania State University- Univ .
ParkThe importance of wireless access is ever increasing .
The wide social impact of becoming tetherless ranges from providing constant reachability in emergency situations ; to providing better educational services in schools with wireless network access .
Future wireless systems are expected to provide much higher capacity due to emerging applications that demand data oriented and multimedia communications services .
This research involves the exploration of attainable performance limits of wireless communication systems .
The scarcity of wireless bandwidth dictates that future systems must utilize multiple antennas in addition to temporal and frequency resources .
The premise of this research is that a significant improvement in wireless system capacity can be achieved by designing transmitters and receivers that jointly optimize all system resources.The investigator considers interference limited multiuser wireless communication systems where users `` share '' the transmission medium in a non-partitioned manner .
The signal processing framework developed is for a most general shared channel where multiple transmit and receive antennas are used , code division grants sharing of time and frequency resources , and multiple data streams are transmitted per user .
Thefocus is on understanding the performance limits under different channel/system constraints as well as methods that achieve these limits .
The research issues considered include characterization of the maximum number of users that can be supported when jointly optimum temporal-spatial transmission and temporal-spatial reception techniques are employed ; characterization of the optimum transmitters ( and receivers ) and design and analysis of algorithms that converge to these transmitters ( and the corresponding receivers ) ; investigation of the robustness of the techniques and results under different channel/system conditions as well as when partial/inaccurate information is available about these conditions ; implementation of the resulting algorithms on a wireless testbed .
The eastern flank of the Andes supports the richest flora and fauna in the world .
Climate change and forest destruction threaten these habitats .
Research will be undertaken to provide the first detailed information on the composition of modern forest communities on the Andean flank of southern Peru , and how those communities change along an elevational gradient ( 600 m to 3000 m elevation ) .
Simultaneously , an investigation will be made at eight sites on that gradient to determine the changes of local forest communities since the peak of the last ice age .
Fossil pollen and diatoms recovered from ancient lake sediment will provide a detailed record of how lake systems and local forests responded to past sudden climatic change , such as rapid cooling events within the last ice age , and the rapid warming associated with the start of the present interglacial .
Information will be provided on how forest community diversity has changed through time , and whether changes in communities were restricted to just the rare species or affected all species equally .
These data will help biologists understand how high diversity floras and faunas , with a high proportion of endemic species , can survive climate change , and what will be required to conserve them .
In recent years , there have been some initial demonstrations of organic transistor-based gas sensors .
These initial demonstrations have established that sensors using different organic active layers show different responses to different odors and gas-phase toxins .
While individually these sensors do not offer much specificity , they may potentially be arrayed to form an electronic nose , offering high sensitivity and selectivity to a wide range of analytes , in a manner analogous to a dog 's nose .
In particular , it may be possible to form ultra-low cost sensors suitable for such cost-sensitive applications as distributed environmental monitoring and content monitoring of food and pharmaceutical packages .
This may be achieved by fabricating the entire organic sensor array using a low-cost printing technology on a low-cost flexible substrate .
Such a technology will usher in an era of unprecedented public safety , reduced product wastage , and proactive environmental protection since the sensors may be deployed in ubiquitous sensor networks due to their extremely low cost and flexibility .
Within this proposal , the investigators will develop the device and materials technologies necessary for an arrayed sensor system , and will use these to demonstrate an integrated low-cost electronic array offering high sensitivity and specificity .
Specifically , they will develop a manufacturing technology for forming these sensors on low cost plastic substrates entirely using inkjet printing .
Diverse families of active layer materials will be arrayed to form high specificity sensor arrays on low-cost plastic substrates , ensuring low cost while simultaneously providing high specificity and sensitivity.An undergraduate and a graduate student will be involved in performing this work .
The interdisciplinary nature of this work will further the knowledge base of both students .
In particular , the mentoring of the undergraduate student will be emphasized through critical review programs and experimental design and metrology tutorials .
The results of this proposal will also be used in a University-sponsored high-school outreach program .
High-school students will be invited to visit the laboratory and to gain hands-on experience with inkjet-based circuit fabrication .
This will increase the level of interest in science and engineering among local high-school students .
Furthermore , the investigators will devote much effort to enabling transfer of the technology to researchers in industry and other academic groups through publications , web-based technology dissemination , and industrial interactions .
An integral part of the educational component of this program focuses on the recruitment and retention of underrepresented minority groups .
The PI will travel regularly to the eastern and southeastern United States to meet with minority students at HBCU 's to advise on opportunities for advanced studies in EECS at Berkeley .
A representative from BGESS ( the organization of the Black Graduate Engineering and Science Students at UC Berkeley ) will accompany him to facilitate this .
This activity will be used to substantially increase the enrollment and retention of underrepresented groups in EECS at Berkeley .
This project targets high energy , short lived , reactive molecules for study .
The molecules of interest are generated by photolysis of synthetic precursors and the stable products of their chemical reactions are identified .
Through UV-visible and infrared spectroscopic studies at time scales ranging from nanosecond to picosecond , complemented by Density Functional Theory calculations , four main objectives will be targeted .
The rates with which photochemically generated reactive intermediates lose heat to solvent will be measured , and possible rearrangements to more stable isomers as they cool will be explored .
New reactive intermediates will be probed by nanosecond time resolved flash photolysis of precursors at 77K .
Specific solvation of carbenes in coordinating solvents will be examined .
Carbenoids and nitrenoids derived from the reactions of carbenes and nitrenes with salts will be characterized by both time resolved spectroscopy and by chemical reactivity studies.With this Award , the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program continues support for the research of Professor Matthew S. Platz of the Department of Chemistry at Ohio State University .
Professor Platz creates and studies interesting highly reactive and short-lived molecules .
Although such molecules are of basic scientific interest , they have much practical value in making larger molecules .
They are also used by biochemists to attach small probe molecules to larger ones such as proteins , by materials scientists and in industry as photoresists and in lithography .
Students working on this project will be educated to become problem solvers who will eventually apply their skills to solving problems in the chemical and pharmaceutical industries and in academe .
Ever since the pioneering work of Adolf Schultz , primatologists have shown a sustained interest in the skeletal developmental correlates of life history variation among primates , and in their implications for understanding the evolution of life history .
More recently , the fossil record has been the direct focus of such comparative work .
New tools in dental microstructure are available for teasing out aspects of life history variation among extinct species and have begun to be applied with great success to subfossil lemurs .
Teeth preserve within them a permanent record of their development enabling researchers to retrieve longitudinal developmental data from single adult specimens .
This is not merely extremely useful for exploring life history variation among extinct species , but it promises to revolutionize our understanding of some aspects of the life histories of extant species as well .
Scientific merit This study will bring the study of dental microstructure and other new analytical tools to bear on one of the most fascinating groups of extinct primates the giant subfossil lemurs of Madagascar .
Their closest living relatives , the extant lemurs , show remarkable variation in the timing of dental , craniofacial , and somatic growth and development , all within the context of a highly seasonal and unpredictable environments .
These differing patterns of dental and skeletal growth relate to variation in lemur life history strategies - in particular , to the trade-off between adult female survival and reproductive effort .
By combining data on the behavioral ontogeny of food processing ( using new techniques in use-wear analyses ) , dental development and eruption ( via radiography ) , and dental microstructural analyses of single adult specimens , this project will address questions never before asked of extinct primates How long was gestation in giant lemurs ?
How rapidly did they grow ?
At what age did weaning occur in these species , and how prolonged was the weaning transition ?
Do frugivorous lemur species grow more slowly than like-sized folivores , as predicted by the ecological risk aversion hypothesis ?
Does the seasonal scheduling of growth in extinct lemurs cause a large proportion of adult size to be achieved before weaning , or do fundamentally different rates of infant growth characterize extinct lemur taxa as they do extant lemurs ?
Finally , advances in landmark-based 3-D geometric morphometrics ( e.g. , Morphologika , HETPAD ) , along with conventional analysis of trait-age matrices to chronicle the relationships between dental , brain and craniofacial development in extinct lemurs , allows us to test current hypotheses regarding the evolution of life history strategies in what is perhaps the world 's most unique and diverse adaptive radiation of primates .
Ultimately , this study will provide the evolutionary developmental framework for understanding the evolution of life history variation in primates .
Broader impact An important broader impact of this study is graduate and postgraduate training .
One of the PIs has a Malagasy graduate student who is studying lemurs and has expressed an interest in learning the techniques described here .
The microstructural work required here will also provide ideal training for a two-year postdoctoral associate .
Furthermore , the PIs have ongoing collaborations with others in the realms of Madagascar 's paleobiology , lemur ecology , ecomorphology , heterochrony and skeletal ontogeny , and dental microstructure .
We expect the work described here to intersect profitably with other research projects , and thus to inform research on the evolution of primate community structure in Madagascar , the patterns and causes of extinction , and the evolutionary developmental biology of primates .
This Interagency Agreement ( IA ) provides that the Natinoal Science Foundation Directorate for Engineering ( NSF ) will order services from the Library of Congress Federal Research Program , which is administered by the Library of Congress Federal Research Divison ( LOC/FRD ) , to fulfill NSF 's requirement for research reports , translations , and analytical studies .
This is a 5-year continuing award .
This research effort will address the application of immersive virtual environments ( VEs ) to the architectural design and construction industries .
Specifically , it aims to make immersive design applications - those in which the designer can create or modify a 3D space while immersed within it - possible .
There are four components to this work .
First , the PI will design and evaluate user-centered 3D interaction techniques specially targeted at design and construction tasks .
He will then design and implement a high-level software framework that supports rapid prototyping and development of immersive design applications .
Next , he will develop several proof-of-concept VE applications using the domain-specific interaction techniques and implemented in the software framework .
Finally , the PI will educate students , both in HCI ( through a new course and textbook on 3D interaction ) , and in the design disciplines ( through the use in courses of the VE applications developed in this project ) .
This research will have a significant impact in the VE and 3D interaction communities , leading to an increased understanding of how interaction techniques can be tailored to particular tasks and domains .
The software framework will impact research in immersive design , allowing graphics and VE novices ( domain experts ) to build powerful interactive VE applications .
The example applications the PI builds will impact the design and construction industries , providing a tighter design cycle and an increased understanding of difficult 3D problems .
And there will also be a two-pronged impact in the classroom , where the PI will use VE technology as a learning tool in the design disciplines and introduce cutting-edge research in 3D interaction to graduate-level HCI students .
A grant has been awarded to Dr. Mark O. Martin of Occidental College to study the genetics of the bacterial predator Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus .
This unusual microbe exists in two forms a free swimming phase in search of other Gram negative bacterial prey cells to attack and invade , and an intraperiplasmic growth phase between the inner and outer membranes of prey cells .
Different genes are expressed in each portion of the life cycle of Bdellovibrio , and this project proposes to investigate these predation genes .
A combination of functional complementation , reporter gene technology , transposon mutagenesis , and other molecular biological tools will be used to investigate the genetics of this fascinating bacterium .
A previously identified and unexpected alpha amylase gene from Bdellovibrio will be characterized with regard to structure , function , relationship to other amylases , and temporal expression throughout the organism 's lifecycle .
In addition , transposon mutagenesis and in vivo expression technology will be used to identify and characterize Bdellovibrio genes involved with predation and intraperiplasmic growth.It is expected that bacterial predation will be found to play a significant role in microbial ecology and population structure ; thus , intensive study of Bdellovibrio will be an important first step in understand the roles that microbial predators play in nature .
The compartment in which Bdellovibrio grows and reproduces , the periplasm of prey cells , is unusual and difficult to study .
Bdellovibrio 's adaptations to this environment will shed light on the nature of the periplasm in ways that can not easily be matched by in vitro studies .
Additionally , the periplasmic life style of Bdellovibrio may show relationships to the diverse strategies used by bacteria that cause disease in animals and plants .
Importantly , this proposal involves undergraduate students at every step .
Because of the demographics of Occidental College , this grant will provide many opportunities for students from diverse backgrounds , including underrepresented minorities , to explore a unique research system .
Additionally , the techniques used in this proposal will be incorporated into the laboratory portions of relevant courses , to give all students the opportunity to explore microbial genetic analysis how research is actually carried out , and how results are interpreted , evaluated , and presented .
Not Available 0237479 Burd The proposal addresses the role that nano-scale colloids play in the transport of trace metals and pollutants in natural environmental and engineered systems.The combination of experimental studies encompassing microscopic methods ( AFM and EM ) , synchrotron-based methods ( SAXS , XAS ) , and multi-scale modeling will aid in elucidating the significance of particulate material in aquatic systems.This project is collaborative and multi-disciplinary , combining expertise from chemistry , biology , and modeling to investigate the role of fibrils and macromolecules in inorganic colloid aggregation .
Results of this work should help in the understanding the self-cleansing capacity of fresh , estuarine and marine waters through transport and sedimentation .
Of special interest is the understanding of the similarities and differences between freshwater and seawater.This proposal was received in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering Initiative , NSF 01-157 , category NIRT .
The National Science Foundation supports the Conference on Perception and Realization in Language and Gender Research .
This conference will held during the intersession of the 2003 Linguistic Society of America Summer Institute at Michigan State University .
The conference will combine invited papers , panel discussions , poster sessions , and workshops .
The goal is to increase awareness of international perspectives on the rapidly expanding linguistic subfield of language and gender and to forge ties between researchers in the U.S. and other countries by providing multiple opportunities for focus on a single question How is the relationship between language and gender perceived and realized , both by speakers and by researchers themselves ?
This theme recognizes growing attention to the question of the empirical validity of any relationship between language and gender .
Until recently , such a relationship was thought to be more or less fixed in gender difference and to obtain across many contexts of language use .
Language and gender research emphasized this relationship by documenting specific gender differences in language use and developing explanations based on culture or power .
In the past 15 years , researchers have focused less on differences and more on the role of context in the study of female and male speakers .
This reframing of the field has produced a new set of research questions regarding perceived associations between gender and particular linguistic features as well as the realization of such associations in specific contexts of language use .
These questions include How can one be sure that a linguistic phenomenon is associated with gender ?
How and when are gender identities salient ?
To what extent do perceptions of gendered language use correspond to linguistic manifestations of gender identity ? The project will lead to scientific advancement in language and gender research by bringing together representatives of various theoretical , methodological , and disciplinary perspectives to address newly central issues in the field .
In addition , the conference provides a rare opportunity to bring current concerns in language and gender to the linguistics community at large , and to provide education and training to graduate students at the early stages of their graduate careers .
The conference will also support the education of undergraduates and the application of language and gender research findings to real-world problems , such as issues of gender and language in institutional contexts like the law , medicine , and education .
Results of the conference will made available electronically as working papers as well as in traditional published form .
To make conference results accessible and inexpensive for the widest possible audience , online publication will be especially promoted .
Not Available The University of Hawaii has proposed a plan for Research Infrastructure Improvement ( RII ) with the overarching theme of Biodiversity in an Integrated Environment .
The project involves the collaboration of the University of Hawaii campuses at Manoa and Hilo .
The effort will be directed at three research thrust areas that are consistent with the state 's commitment to a research agenda that targets responsible stewardship of its island ecosystems evolutionary genetics , ecosystems , and information technology for environmental research .
The research agenda will focus on Hawaii 's native and introduced invasive species and consider the impact of human activities on ecosystem functionality and biological diversity .
Hawaii investigators will use new molecular and technical approaches to study timely and substantive environmental research questions .
A partnership with Kamehameha Schools will enable researchers , educators and students access to land of tremendous diversity for enriched research and educational experiences .
An Environmental Information Technology Research Network will be established to store and retrieve spacial data that can be used to model ecosystem processes throughout the Hawaiian Islands and serve as a central clearinghouse for biological resource datasets.Hawaii 's RII effort will strengthen and increase interactions and collaborations among researchers within the state as well as with US mainland researchers and integrate research in biodiversity with educational and outreach activities .
K-12 students and teachers will interact with university researchers in field work designed to increase math and science interest and learning in Hawaii 's youth , particularly Native Hawaiian students .
Infrastructure support will also include funding of faculty and student travel , start-up funding for new faculty , seed funding ' to promote competitive collaborations among investigators and support for research experiences of community college students .
Not Available Proposal ID AST-0237391Institution University of KentuckyPI Levenson , NancyDr .
Nancy Levenson is awarded a CAREER grant at the University of Kentucky for an integrated program of research and education to study the obscuration by dust and resulting reprocessing of energy in active galaxies , ultimately revealing the intrinsic accretion power of their central engines .
She and her students will observe nearby samples of obscured active galactic nuclei ( AGN ) with three specific objectives ( 1 ) to measure the local physical conditions and distribution of material in the obscuring regions ; ( 2 ) to identify reliable signatures of AGN , even when they are strongly obscured ; and ( 3 ) to reveal the connection between circumnuclear starbursts and AGN .
This work will use spectroscopy and imaging at X-ray and infrared energies , specifically considering the effects of strong obscuration and intense star formation , which can alter the net emission significantly .
The related educational program will enhance the undergraduate astronomy concentration at the University of Kentucky , improve the education of non-scientists , and develop students ' abilities through research .
Dr. Levenson will increase the effectiveness of the astronomy concentration by creating an intermediate-level astrophysics course , increasing student involvement in research , and producing new publicity about the program .
In teaching both science and non-science majors , she will apply effective pedagogies that emphasize active learning , such as collaborative learning , peer instruction , and assigned writing .
Finally , Dr. Levenson will mentor undergraduate and graduate students , directing their work in the research program .
Horizontal or lateral gene transfer ( HGT ) denotes the exchange of genetic information between organisms as opposed to vertical inheritance , i.e .
the passing of genes from parent to daughter cells .
This project will study the relative contributions of HGT and vertical inheritance to microbial evolution .
First , the extent of intra-gene mosaicism will be explored .
Individual genes can be mosaic as a result of recombination .
Preliminary data indicate that in the case of ribosomal RNA intra-gene mosaicism might not be a rare event .
Statistical tests will be developed to assess how frequently intra-gene mosaicism occurred during microbial evolution .
These tests will utilize simulated sequence evolution incorporating different models with varying amounts of HGT and recombination .
Second , genome evolution will be simulated to address the following question Are the confidently detected instances of HGT the tip of an iceberg , the bulk of which remains below the detection limit ?
Or are many of the alleged transfer events artifacts due to compositional bias , convergent evolution and unrecognized gene duplications ?
The simulations will include different frequencies of recombination and will utilize different models to simulate sequence evolution .
Simulations that take the detection levels for horizontal gene transfer and intra-gene mosaicism into consideration will move the study of horizontal gene transfer beyond a compilation of anecdotal evidence .
Third , a relaxed molecular clock model will be used to analyze the early evolution of prokaryotic life .
Time estimates and their credibility intervals will be obtained for individual gene families .
Dates for key evolutionary events estimated from compatible datasets will be combined to achieve more accurate divergence time estimates This research program addresses the design of molecules which will permit the development of functional materials and devices .
Fluorescent and photochromic compounds will be embedded into solid polmer matrices .
The resulting molecule-based materials will be integrated into device configurations designed to execute logic operations relying exclusively on optical inputs and outputs .
These solid-state all-optical logic gates will process multiple optical signals .
Electron deficient surface coatings will be assembled from electroactive and fluorescent building blocks .
The resulting molecule-based materials will recognize and immobilize electron rich substrates at solid/liquid interfaces , providing new avenues for sensor development .
Students will be trained in the multidisciplinary fields of nanoscience and nanotechnology through a combination of lecture and laboratory investigations .
A research forum for regional colleges and a research opportunity program targeting minority students will provide cohesiveness and foster exchanges and collaborations.With the support of this CAREER Award from the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program , Professor Francisco Raymo , of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Miami , is exploring the preparation of molecule-based materials and devices .
Professor Raymo is developing new strategies for all-optical multi-channel signal processing which will complement current optical fiber technology .
He is also preparing novel materials designed to permit facile detection and recognition of selected molecules , forming the basis of new sensor technologies .
Professor Raymo is training students , both in the laboratory and in the lecture hall , in the modern techniques and concepts of nanoscience and nanotechnology .
In addition , he is bringing research opportunities to minority students and coordinating multi-institutional exchanges and collaborations .
In this project functional analysis will be used to understand how the shapes of systems are connected with energy levels , whether arising as eigenvalues of linear equations , such as the Schroedinger equation which describes quantum mechanical particles , or arising from nonlinear equations like those describing carrier transport in semiconductors .
Small parameters are often present , whether Planck 's constant or a physical dimension , and careful asymptotics are required in order to elucidate the role of the geometry of a domain .
It is intended to seek useful estimates of energies and other physical quantities in terms of curvature , and to determine the shapes and geometric properties that optimize those quantities.This rigorous mathematical research will contribute to nanotechnology and quantum mechanics .
Laboratories are beginning to produce very small-scale electrical devices , including quantum wires and quantum waveguides .
The properties of these devices , such as conductivity and energy levels , are sensitive to their shape and configuration .
This project will make these effects quantitative and help guide the design of devices .
The work also has implications for other quite diverse phenomena described by similar equations .
These include practical applications to the seepage of fluids and the stability of bulk matter , as well as purely mathematical applications to geometry .
AbstractDMS-0204556PI Jianhua HuangLongitudinal data , which involve variables observed repeatedly over time , are common in biomedicine , epidemiology , economics , sociology , and many other fields .
Nonparametric and semiparametric statistical methods provide effective tools for extracting useful information from this type of data .
These methods allow scientists , policy makers and researchers to draw conclusions from their data without depending on pre-specified assumptions that may be too restrictive to their settings .
The objective of this proposal is to develop systematic , theoretically well-founded , and more efficient such methods .
The focus is on the following five topics ( i ) further theoretical and methodological development of the spline-based approach to time-varying coefficient models ; ( ii ) estimation of covariance structures ; ( iii ) extension of time-varying coefficient models to generalized linear models ; ( iv ) extension of time-varying coefficient models to take into account accumulative covariate effects ; ( v ) semiparametric efficient estimation in partly linear models .
These projects involve developing novel estimation and inference procedures , providing theoretical justification , and discussing their theoretical and practical importance to the advancement of biomedical and statistical science .
The research approach will be a combination of theoretical asymptotic analysis , Monte Carlo simulations and real data analysis .
Global smoothing techniques with spline functions will be used .
ABSTRACT0204372Michael GleicherU of Wisconsin-MadisonAs the dangers of our world become more apparent , and our desire to prepare for them increases , there is agrowing need for virtual experiences simulated environments that convey to a participant the sense that theyare in a situation , not just a place .
A virtual experience can provide an opportunity to explore a situation thatis too dangerous to rehearse , too impractical to create , or too inconvenient to attend .
They may be used fortraining , for example to give first hand experience to emergency response personnel in directing panickedcrowds ; for design , for example to determine how people interact with a space before it is constructed ; orfor entertainment .
The key to a virtual experience is that they combine environment and situation .
Simplycreating a visually compelling virtual environment is insufficient.Our vision is to use compelling virtual experiences in training , research and entertainment .
To be effec-tive in these applications , virtual environments must be authored to meet specific pedagogical and commu-nicative goals .
Realizing this vision , therefore , requires technologies for both simulating and rendering theworlds and enabling an author to specify behavior effectively .
EIA-0204398Lambert , KatherineSonger , TimInstitution Girl Scouts Hornets ' Nest CouncilTitle Girls Are IT ! The Girl Scouts , Hornets ' Nest Council has been extremely active in the lives of adolescent girls in the Charlotte regional community for over 65 years .
In the 21st century , this involves reaching out to widely diverse populations including recent immigrants from Asia , Latin America , Africa and Eastern Europe .
The success of these outreach programs depends on understanding the language and culture of the families in these communities and providing activities , support , and education that is deemed appropriate and relevant for all of the girls and adults involved.Girls all over the country are faced with a range of opportunities that were not available to previous generations .
Part of the Girl Scout mission is to help girls gain insight into coping with contemporary moral and social dilemmas .
Through a series of Girl-Scout-sponsored series of innovative and engaging programs , girls learn about preventing teen pregnancy , avoiding substance abuse , and understanding the influence of popular culture on creating faulty self-images regarding one 's body and mind.With support from ITWF , the Hornets ' Nest Council will deliver this content in a new and innovative way - through a custom technology-based simulation entitled , Making Choices .
Making Choices will use a variety of technologies including wireless networked laptop computers , Personal Digital Assistants ( PDAs ) , printers , scanner and digital cameras to deliver a series of simulation activities ( totaling 3-5 hours of instructions ) .
A research evaluation study will assess attitudes of girls and women volunteers who participate in the standard programs versus the technology-based programs .
0204032WardThis is a collaborative research project between Dr. James R. Ward of University of Alabama at Birmingham , and Dr. Raul Manasevich and Marta Garcia-Huidobro of Universidad de Chile and Pontifica Universidad Catolica de Chile respectively .
The investigators intend to work on the mathematical analysis of boundary value problems for partial differential equations .
These problems appear in modeling both slow and fast diffusion , and are useful in the study of populations and diseases , porous media , and problems that are inherently nonlinear .
The investigators will use topological tools , such as degree and homotopy indexes , that are useful indicators of system behavior.Each side brings their own strengths to the collaboration Drs .
Garcia-Huidobro and Manasevich have extensive experience in quasilinear differential equations and bifurcations , while Dr. Ward has worked at length with the topological tools to be used in their joint effort .
The research program has a two-pronged approach aimed at identifying important areas in imaging that are ripe for enhanced mathematical treatment .
The PI 's main goal is to apply newly developed mathematical tools to such imaging problems as well as to consider new imaging situations that suggest the need to develop or adapt new mathematical techniques .
The classical theory of scalar valued spherical functions unifies a number of classical approximation methods .
These include Jacobi polynomials , Bessel functions , Laguerre polynomials , Hermite polynomials , and Legendre functions .
The PI has extended this theory to matrix valued situations .
This will be the main tool in solving the imaging problems .
Natural candidates involve areas where polarization or anisotropy ( as in optical tomography ) play important roles .
These imaging methods will be applied in biomedical areas , including X-ray , magnetic resonance , X-ray crystallography , and optical tomography .
The National Research Council rported that there was a potential for great progress in the emerging field of optical or diffuse tomography , where one aims at obtaining images with the use of very low energy probes , like infrared lasers .
From the beginning there was a need to deal both with attenuation and scattering .
The techniques developed in this research should improve the ability to reconstruct images using these techniques .
Other applications envisaged are repeated mammographies and certain brain blood flow studies ( measuring oxygen content ) in neonatal clinics .
The PI will work closely with those who are developing the instrumation hardware .
With National Science Foundation support , Dr. David R. Abbott and his colleagues will conduct 21 months of archaeological research focused on the unusually complex economy and the regional ceremonial network of the ancient Hohokam people .
The Hohokam were desert farmers and craftsmen who inhabited hundreds of villages with populations of 200 residents or more through out southern and central Arizona from ca .
A.D. 300 until A.D. 1450 .
During previous NSF-funded research , it was shown that nearly all ceramic containers used during the Sedentary period ( ca .
A.D. 900-1100 ) were made by few hands and were widely distributed to households across a large territory .
An efficient and dependable mechanism for supply was clearly extant at that time , but by the succeeding Classic period ( ca .
A.D. 1100-1375 ) ceramic production had reverted to local manufacturing for local consumption .
Those results evoke questions about how far back into Hohokam prehistory large-scale pottery production was practiced and how so many pots were so widely distributed .
One hypothesis explains the Sedentary period ceramic distributions with possible periodic marketplaces associated ritual ball games played in more than 225 ballcourts spread throughout the region .
These ball games drew crowds from surrounding and probably distant villages and may have served as venues where specialist-made pots and other domestic necessities were regularly bartered beyond the limits of kinship networks .
This idea implies far more sophisticated economic arrangements than any previously supposed for the Hohokam .
To further investigate this idea , the vessel forms and production sources of ceramic assemblages from the Colonial ( ca .
A.D. 775-900 ) , late Pioneer ( ca .
A.D. 700-775 ) , and early Pioneer ( pre-A.D. 700 ) periods will be analyzed to determine how ceramic production and distribution were organized during each time period and determine for how long the sophisticated division of labor for ceramic production was extant among the Hohokam .
Did it precede , parallel , or succeed the development of the ballcourt network , which began during the late Pioneer period and greatly expanded during the Colonial and Sedentary periods ?
The new research will also use recent chronological refinements to determine if the shift to localized ceramic production was coeval with the collapse of the ballcourt ceremonialism near the end of the Sedentary period .
This research is important because it contributes to building cultural evolutionary theory and highlights the remarkable accomplishments of ancient Native American peoples in the Southwest .
Sophisticated economics without centrally controlled and hierarchical political institutions make the Hohokam a fascinating exception to evolutionary suppositions that link organizational complexity with hierarchical structures .
As such , reconstructing how their large and intricate networks developed and worked may be pivotal for improving synthetic theories of culture change .
The goal of this research is to develop a comprehensive co-design methodology , including algorithms and tools to facilitate the simultaneous power , noise margin , signal integrity , and power economy design with few , if any , design iterations .
The key objectives are1 .
Develop novel hierarchical , efficient , distributed and accurate system-level power delivery RLS models and analysis tools to evaluate power reduction and noise-immune design techniques for power delivery.2 .
Develop efficient power and area estimation algorithms at the architecture level and at the physical design level .
A collisionless plasma is a fully ionized gas in which electromagnetic forces dominate collisional effects .
The motion of a high temperature , low density collisionless plasma is described by the Vlasov-Maxwell equations , a nonlinear system of hyperbolic partial differential equations .
In this setting collisions are ignored while the charge and current densities ( which drive the Maxwell system ) are determined in a self-consistent manner from velocity moments of solutions to the Vlasov equation .
The major question to be studied is this are there shocks in a three dimensional collisionless plasma ?
That is , could a singularity develop from smoothly prescribed initial values as time progresses ?
Smooth global solutions are known to exist in lower dimensional situations ( e.g. , two space and velocity variables ) and when the data are small.Kinetic Theory includes the study of the motion and properties of plasmas .
Plasmas are often called the fourth state of matter ( after solids , liquids and gases ) ; they account for practically all of the material in the universe .
Plasmas are charged gases and hence are excellent conductors of electricity .
Plasma engines have been used recently to power some NASA spacecraft .
Notable examples of collisionless plasmas include the solar wind , the ionosphere , galactic nebulae and comet tails .
The motion of a plasma is described by a number of complicated equations dictated by physics .
Among the mathematician 's goals are to show that these equations have solutions ( under appropriate conditions ) and to approximate them numerically ( so that one can predict certain behavior in future situations ) .
To show that the Vlasov-Maxwell system has a nice solution would at least partially confirm this system as the right one to describe these phenomena .
DMS-0204558Jonathan L. BlockIn recent years there has been an explosion of interest in theapplications of large scale or coarse methods in geometry , topology , index theory and group theory .
For many topological and geometric problems of interest , this large-scale structure is relevant in answering them .
The Principal Investigator will study three such instances .
First , on a singular space , phenomena are affected not only by the global fundamental group , but alsoby a local picture of the fundamental group .
The fundamental groups of the link of a stratum changes from stratum to stratum and affects the topological behavior of the space , in particular , the classification of stratified spaces must take into account this behavior .
The PI proposes to study via operator K-theoryhow the index theory of the strata of singular spaces ( as non-compact manifolds ) fit together to give an index theory for the singular space itself .
Second , the PI proposes to study more generally quantitative aspects of homology theory , taking into account such issues as the images of the homology of balls of a given size in the homology of a non-compact manifold .
Applications to existence of infinitely many null-homotopic geodesics are proposed .
Third , the large-scale / small-scale duality between a discrete groupand its unitary representation theory has been studied under the rubric of the Baum-Connes conjecture .
The PI , motivated by his work in large scale geometry proposes a broader study of this duality .
This requires the development of tools from algebraic geometry ( especially moduli space theory ) to apply to infinite dimensional unitary representations .
These tools place families of representations at the fore , which as two effects .
First , families of representations seem to be more rigid then single ones .
And secondly , one can concentrate ones attention on specific parts of the representation theory .
Thus , the PI demonstrates , in severalsituations , that for lattices in Lie groups , therepresentation theory in an infinitesimal neighborhood of the trivial representation coincide for the lattice and the ambient group .
A second type of question proposed by the PI are called reconstruction problems .
When can one reconstruct representations on the ambient group knowing its values on thelattice ?
The PI views this as a version of the Sampling theorem from signal processing.Large scale geometry is the study of spaces as seen from an increasingly distant perspective .
For many problems in geometry and topology , the phenomena at a small or moderate scale only obscure the situation and the large scale perspective shines the essential light on the subject seeing the forest for thetrees .
This proposal focuses the attention of large-scale geometry on problems in index theory and representation theory of discrete groups .
Students of PI and his collaborators are involved at various stages of the project .
The developments and anticipated results are intended as a bridge between algebraic and geometric topology , harmonic analysis and functional analysis .
This should provide a clearer understanding of all these subjects and enhance the interaction between the experts in them .
0204513Li This research centers on developing Gaussian methods for the study of rare events , mainly depending on small values of a positive random quantity .
The major objectives are to extend the understanding of related topics and build a general theory based on systematic study of various techniques and applications .
The recent completion of the connection between small ball probabilities and metric entropy problems allows applications of tools and results from functional analysis to provide the most powerful method available at this time for estimating the lower bound for Gaussian processes .
In turn , it suggests many further questions connected to applications in probability theory and geometric functional analysis .
Similar relationships will be studied for other random processes such as stable processes and Gaussian chaos .
The overview on rare events depending on small values unifies many problems from diverse areas in mathematics .
The very successful applications of Gaussian methods to lower tail probabilities , the Brownian pursuit models and the first exit times will be expanded to a detailed study of zeros of random polynomials , balancing vectors , and Hadamard matrices .
The primary focus of this research is a better understanding of rare random phenomena related to Gaussian processes and others which serve as models in many applications .
These types of problems often arise in estimating the chances for rare events to occur in areas where such events are of fundamental importance , such as weather , economic indices , epidemics , etc .
This research should improve our understanding of rare random events and provide basic tools for the study of our random environment .
DMS-0204129Paul G. GoerssHomotopy theory is the study of topological phenomena that remain invariant under fairly flexible sorts of continuous deformations .
Most basically , we seek to compute and to understand homotopy classes of maps between finite simplicial or CW complexes , perhaps after some sort of stabilization .
Computation and understanding are not the same we have forty or more years of computations , but only lately have we begun to have the language to in which to make a coherent theory out of the data we have .
This project is , therefore , as much about exploring and refining the language as it is about calculations -- although there will be a mixture of both .
The entry point is the observation that any cohomology theory with a good theory of Chern classes gives rise to a formal group lawand , hence , a formal group .
Conversely , given a formal groupwe can ask whether there is an associated cohomology theory.These cohomology theories then delineate the finer structureof stable homotopy theory.This is the chromatic picture of stable homotopy we seekto use the algebraic geometry of formal groups to organize and direct investigations into the deeper structure of computations and theory .
This project seeks to develop this point of view in two directions , one local and one global .
The first , or local , direction is an investigation into K ( n ) -local homotopy theory in general and into the K ( n ) -local sphere in particular .
The second , or more global , direction , would be to make systematicour knowledge of structured ring spectra using stacks and the moduli stack of formal groups as the basic parametrizingdevice .
DMS-0204763Kenneth BrombergThe investigator plans to study spaces of hyperbolic metrics on a fixed3-manifold .
Unlike on a closed manifold , on an open 3-manifold there willtypically be a large space of hyperbolic metrics .
The investigatorsgoal is to understand this space .
Some questions are simple to stateIs the deformation space the closure of its interior ?
A more detaileddescription of the space is the ending lamination conjecture , which gives invariants that classify every hyperbolic metric onthe manifold .
This classification is not a parameterization ; the map tothe space of invariants is not continuous .
The investigator isinterested in understanding these discontinuities and describing thetopology of the deformation space of metrics .
Hyperbolic cone-metricsare a key tool used throughout this work .
The philosophy is that verycomplicated geometry in a smooth hyperbolic structure can be exchangedfor a less complicated , but singular , hyperbolic cone metric.Three manifolds are mathematical spaces that locally look like theuniverse we live in .
Mathematicians , beginning with Poincare , have beeninterested in classification question about three manifolds .
Hyperbolicgeometry is also a very old field dating back to the middle of theeighteenth century .
In the last twenty-five years , largely due to the workThurston , it has been realized that there are deep and beautifulconnections between the two topics .
Proposal ID DMS-0204009PI Hongquan XuTitle Nonregular designs Classification , optimality and constructionNonregular designs , such as Plackett-Burman designs and many other orthogonal arrays , are widely used in practice due to their run size economy and flexibility .
However , many commonly used nonregular designs are not optimal .
Unlike regular designs , which have been studied thoroughly in recent years , theory and construction of nonregular designs are still very primitive and urgently needed .
The objectives of this proposed research are to classify and construct optimal nonregular designs .
In the classification part , general frameworks and novel approaches are proposed for investigating the following important issues estimation capacity , design efficiency , projection properties , and aliasing structure .
In the construction part , novel methods and algorithms are proposed for constructing optimal nonregular designs for a wide variety of situations , including supersaturated designs and block designs .
Coding theory will be employed to develop general results for multi-level and mixed-level nonregular designs.Experimental design is an effective and commonly used tool in scientific investigation .
Over the last century , it has made tremendous impact in many areas of research , including agriculture , biology , manufacturing and high-tech industries , and will continue to do so for the foreseeable future .
While most of the existing research has concentrated on the study of regular designs , this proposed research focuses on the study of nonregular designs .
Nonregular designs are widely used in practice due to their run size economy and flexibility , for example , Taguchi designs for process improvement and quality control .
However , it is important to note that many commonly used nonregular designs are not optimal .
Unlike regular designs , which have been studied thoroughly in recent years , theory and construction of nonregular designs are still very primitive and urgently needed .
The objectives of this proposed research are to classify and construct optimal nonregular designs .
This proposal emphasizes an important interdisciplinary connection between error-correcting codes and factorial designs .
The proposed work will develop fundamental results for nonregular designs , and will lead to remarkable new advances in design theory and better practice in experimentation .
DMS-0204080Po HuIn this project , the investigator intends to consider a circle of ideas in algebraic topology and its interactions with other areas of mathematics .
One point of entry to these ideas is Real-oriented homotopy theory , which uses the complex conjugation action on the complex cobordism spectrum to approach homotopy groups of spheres .
The method used here is a case of descent , which appears also in Voevodsky 's homotopy theory of algebraic varieties .
In this direction , the investigator is interested in algebraic cobordism , the algebro-geometric analogue of complex cobordism .
Another closely related idea is that of Verdier and Grothendieck dualities , both in algebraic geometry and in equivariant homotopy theory .
Yet another related but different kind of duality is Koszul duality .
Using this duality , the investigator , jointly with collaborators , proved a version of Kontsevich 's conjecture on Hochschild cohomology of k-algebras .
This in turn is related to the question of deformation quantazation in mathematcial physics .
Another area into which Koszul duality enters is the string topology of Chas and Sullivan , which gives another connection between algebra and homotopy theory .
The investigator is also involved with another project related to physics , namely constructing geometric models of elliptic cohomology.Topology is the study of spaces that can be deformedcontinuously .
In part , this proposal seeks to better understand maps between such objects by `` stable '' methods , i. e. considering a sequence of objects of all higher dimensions at once , and by using certain summetries upon them .
Similar methods can also be used to study more rigid geometric objects , for example in algebraic geometry the solution sets of systems of algebraic equations .
This leads in turn to the study of algebraic structures on an abstract level.Finally , the related idea of string topology considers not just a space itself , but structures on the space consisting of loops in it .
In particular , this is important to string theory in physics , which sees the universe as composed not of point-like particles but of loop-like `` strings '' .
NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0204714Mathematical Sciences Dynamical Systems Methods and Geometric Integrators for Nonlinear Wave EquationsAbstract0204714 SchoberThis project consists of three interrelated topics in the theory and application of nonlinear dispersive waves chaotic dynamics in perturbed nonlinear Schrodinger ( NLS ) equations , the role of homoclinic chaos in the generation of high amplitude ( rogue ) ocean waves , and the development and analysis of structure-preserving integrators for nonlinear wave equations .
Combined experimental and theoretical studies of water waves recently yielded a characterization of the chaotic evolution in perturbed NLS equations that is generic , observable , and physically significant .
Preliminary analysis indicates that similar results hold in fiber optics .
In this project , further experimental , numerical , and theoretical analysis will be carried out .
The latter includes extending the geometric interpretation of the Floquet discriminant and the associated Melnikov integrals for solutions in the full phase space and obtaining criteria for the existence of homoclinic structures for symmetry-breaking perturbations of the NLS equation .
The implication of these results in the context of homoclinic chaos and the likelihood of rogue wave formation will be examined .
The research also involves the development of efficient , stable multi-symplectic integrators for equations of interest in the water wave and optics problems .
A comparison of the multi-symplectic , energy , and momentum errors to the overall performance of the integrators ( including accurate capture of qualitative features of the system ) will be carried out .
Error bounds on the approximate preservation of the local conservation laws will be sought .
The proposed research focuses on mathematical and computational issues central to water wave dynamics and nonlinear optics .
Rogue wave events can have a devastating effect on offshore structures and ships .
The results of this project will address fundamental properties of rogue wave generation and potentially have impact on the design and analysis of structures such as offshore oil rigs .
Soliton solutions of the NLS equation are used to model light pulses in high-speed optical telecommunication systems .
The research on multi-symplectic integrators will yield fast , efficient codes that can be used in numerical simulation of high data rate communication systems and rogue wave events .
Over the next year , the Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Program ( AMAP ) will publish four Arctic environmental assessment reports and a second State of the Arctic Environment Report ( SOAER ) , and also conduct a Second AMAP International Symposium on Environmental Pollution of the Arctic .
The publication and the international symposium will be based on updated information and a substantial amount of additional data that were not available for similar activities in 1997-1998.Acting on behalf of the U.S. federal agencies participating in AMAP , NOAA will coordinate Federal support for the publications and the symposium .
Other federal agencies are expected to contribute ( or have already contributed ) $ 85 , 500 for these purposes .
NOAA 's Arctic Research Office will arrange transfer of all the contributed funds to the AMAP Secretariat and will oversee expenditure of the funds by the AMAP Secretariat .
Proposal ID DMS-0204612PI Trevor HastieTitle Flexible statistical modelingAbstractThe investigator and his students will study the popular support vector machines from the viewpoint of the traditional logistic regression model ( with regularization ) .
While the latter exhibits very similar generalization performance to the SVM , it has several advantages it estimates class probabilities , and generalizes to multiclass problems seamlessly .
This and several other even simpler approaches will be developed for the classification of gene expression arrays.This proposal will thus develop useful models for making class predictions in a variety of high-dimensional situations , in particular for gene expression arrays .
While the science journals abound with exotic statistical and computational algorithms for use in this fashionable domain , this investigator and his colleagues firmly believe that some very simple modifications of classical approaches perform as well or better , and are easier to understand .
ABSTRACT DMS - 0204667.PI Zhiqin Lu On the Geometry of Kaehler-Einstein ManifoldIn this project , the proposer is going to understandKaehler-Einstein metrics , especially Calabi-Yau manifoldsusing the theory of moduli spaces , through three differentways .
The first way is to study the potential function ofthe Bergman metric of a polarized compact Kaehlermanifold .
For the application in the Kaehler-Einsteingeometry , one needs to estimate the potential function frombelow for a family of manifolds .
The problem is related tothe stability of manifolds in the sense of GeometricInvariant Theory .
The second way is to study the relationbetween the K stability and the Mumford stability .
Such arelation , if exists , would give one new insights of therelations between the Kaehler-Einstein geometry and thestability of manifolds .
The third way is the geometry ofmoduli space of polarized Calabi-Yau manifolds .
A Kaehlermetric on the moduli space has been defined and was foundthat the Ricci curvature of such a metric is negative awayfrom zero by the proposer .
In order to introduce geometricanalysis to the place , one needs to prove a version of themaximal principle on the moduli space , even if the modulispace , in general , is not smooth.Einstein 's general theory of relativity is a theory thatinterprets the concept of gravity into the geometricproperty of the space .
Recent development of in physicsshows that the universe may be of dimension ten , with threedimension in space and one dimension in time plus a tinysix dimensional space called Calabi-Yau threefold .
One ofthe main mathematical tool to study the geometry of thespace is differential geometry .
Since the discovery of thegeneral relativity , differential geometry becomes crucial toboth mathematicians and physicists .
The project is one ofthe main field in differential geometry .
It will help a lotin understanding one of the basic force of the universe thegravity and ultimately understanding the space we are livingwith .
It is difficult to believe that without an extensivestudy of fundamental sciences such as general relativity , modern technology like the use of atomic energy can cometrue .
By the same reason , today 's fundamental study will notonly enlarge our knowledge but eventually benefit people'slife as well .
DMS Award AbstractAward # 0204225PI Chen , Gui-QiangInstitution Northwestern University Program Applied MathematicsProgram Manager Catherine MavriplisTitle Nonlinear Problems in Conservation Laws and Fluid Dynamics and Related Partial Differential EquationsThe investigator continues studies of nonlinear problems in conservation laws and fluid dynamics and related nonlinear partial differential equations and their applications , along with the analysis and development of efficient nonlinear methods .
The objective of this research program is twofold ( 1 ) to investigate important nonlinear problems such as multidimensional transonic shocks and free boundary problems , vacuum problems , asymptotic stability problems , compressible fluids with various constitutive relations , singular limit problems , multiphase problems , and the Riemann problem to gain new physical insights , to guide the formulation of efficient nonlinear methods , and to find the correct function spaces in which to pose the nonlinear conservation laws and develop the numerical methods that converge stably and rapidly ; and ( 2 ) to analyze and develop nonlinear methods including free boundary methods , kinetic methods , geometric measure methods , weak convergence methods , shock capturing techniques , energy methods , and related potential techniques to formulate new , more efficient nonlinear methods and to solve various more important nonlinear problems in conservation laws and fluid dynamics.The nonlinear problems and related partial differential equations in this research program arise in such areas as gas dynamics , hydraulics , combustion , magnetohydrodynamics , semiconductor , elasticity , multiphase flow , phase transitions , kinetic theory , biophysics , and material science .
The award will support research on the solvability of these nonlinear problems and related partial differential equations , the qualitative behavior of their solutions and related applications , as well as the analysis and development of nonlinear methods in applied analysis and numerical analysis .
This research will lead to a deeper understanding of nonlinear phenomena and will provide more efficient nonlinear methods and theories for applications.Date May 1 , 2002 This small grant for exploratory research investigates the mechanisms by which people show resilient responses to the events surrounding the September 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks .
The project focuses on how positive emotions allow for psychological resilience in the face of ongoing threat .
Psychological resilience involves the ability to overcome stress and even thrive in the face of adversity .
Much of the existing literature focuses on the predictors of resilience ( e.g. , individual , social protective factors ) and their outcomes ( e.g. , positive mental and physical health ) .
Remarkably , very little attention has been given to the underlying mechanisms that contribute to this capacity to fare well , especially in the face of ongoing stressful experiences .
In light of the continuing threat and vulnerability associated with the aftermath of the September 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center and Pentagon , including threats involving bioterrorism , war , and economic turbulence , it is important to examine the factors that protect individuals from developing negative psychological consequences associated with on-going stress of a serious nature .
The continued threat associated with the ambiguity of future events could have dire consequences on an individual 's decision-making strategies for future events in a host of life domains , possibly resulting in psychological and physical damage to the individual .
This project examines three possible mechanisms that might begin to explain the process by which positive emotions are useful in achieving resilience , especially in the face of ongoing threat emotional complexity , attention , and tolerance of ambiguity .
The aim of the project is to conduct initial tests of a conceptual model , which illustrates how positive emotions promote psychological resilience .
The Infinity Scholars program at Iowa Lakes Community College provides scholarship assistance to 32 academically talented , financially needy students enrolled full-time in computer science , computer technology , engineering and mathematics programs .
The overarching goal of the program is to increasethe number of talented , low-income students enrolled and retained in these degree programsenabling them to enter the high technology workforce .
The program establishes and maintains an infrastructure of support services for Infinity Scholars that includes a one credit hour Infinity Scholars Course that concludes with the completion of a capstone project .
The Infinity Scholars program focuses on delivering a menu of educational services and learning experiences that retain students and support a seamless transition to job placement upon degree attainment from the community college , or transfer of students to 4-year institutions .
This individual investigator award will provide support for a program that focuses on the study of electron correlation effects in two-dimensional systems , such as ultra-thin magnetic-impurity-doped Be films , and ultra-thin superconducting Be and Al films .
Some bulk materials with a strongly layered structure such as superconducting LaSb2 and metamagnetic SmSb2 will also be studied .
One of the primary goals of the program is to investigate the transport and tunneling characteristics of these systems in high magnetic fields and low temperatures .
Their behavior in such extreme environments gives insight into how low dimensionality , disorder , and correlations can give rise to exotic effects such state memory , reentrance , multifold magnetoresistance , non-equilibrium fluctuations , and quantum transitions .
Besides being at the forefront of condensed matter research , the program will provide an important venue for the training undergraduates , graduate students , and K-12 science teachers .
The latter will be made possible by sponsoring summer internships for Teach For America corps members .
This individual investigator award provides support for a program that investigates how the repulsive interactions between electrons affects their ability to conduct electricity and more importantly how these interactions can orchestrate seemingly improbable behavior such as memory effects and extremely large increases in resistance with the application of magnetic field .
Emphasis is placed on systems for which the electron motion is confined to a plane such as is the case for metal films that are only a few atoms thick .
The behavior of these systems gives insight into how low dimensionality , disorder , and electronic correlations can give rise to novel and perhaps useful properties that may one day be of technological relevance .
This type of search and discovery research is important for maintaining the health of the national research and development enterprise .
The program also provides an important venue for the training undergraduates , graduate students , and K-12 science teachers .
The latter is made possible by being a summer internship sponsor for Teach For America corps members .
As intrinsic leakage in transistor increases with technology scaling the effectiveness of quiescent current ( IDDQ ) testing reduces significantly .
Transient current ( IDD ) based testing has been often cited and investigated as an alternative and/or supplement to IDDQ testing in Digital CMOS circuits .
While the potential of IDD testing for fault detection has been established for digital and analog circuits , there is no known efficient method for fault diagnosis using IDD analysis .
We propose a novel integrated method for fault detection and diagnosis in digital CMOS circuits using IDD waveform analysis using wavelet transform .
We use wavelet transform to decompose the IDD waveform in both time and frequency domain .
The time-frequency resolution of the IDD signal helps us detect as well as localize faults .
Initial experimental results on an 8-bit ALU show that wavelet based IDD analysis has the potential to efficiently detect and localize faults considering practical issues like effect of process variation and measurement noise .
Transient current ( IDD ) analysis can also be effective for defect oriented testing of analog circuits .
We observe that wavelet transform renders an efficient way for analyzing IDD for fault detection in analog circuits .
The property of wavelet for resolving events in both time and frequency domain simultaneously and the property of better sub-banding than Fourier analysis , makes it a effective tool for IDD analysis .
Moreover wavelet transform can be easily adapted to current waveforms from different circuits .
We have observed that for equivalent number of spectral components , sensitivity of wavelet based fault detection in analog circuits is much higher than fourier or time-domain analysis for both catastrophic and parametric faults .
Initial experimental results on a benchmark circuit show that wavelet based method is on average 25 times more sensitive than DFT for parametric faults and can be considered as a promising alternative for analog fault detection amidst measurement hardware noise and process variation .
In the proposed research we will develop an integrated fault detection and diagnosis methodology using wavelet based transient current analysis for mixed-signal circuits.We will present the results of our research in domestic and international conferences .
International conferences include ( International Conference on CAD and CG in Macau , December 2003 , and International Conference on CAD and CG 2005 ; IEEE Design and Test in Europe ) .
ABSTRACT0204113Gene CoopermanNotrheastern UThe proposed research is part of an ongoing project to provide the software infrastructure for large symbolic computations .
It is proposed to employ the rich set of computational group theory algorithms , with which the P.I .
is intimately familiar , as a testbed for analyzing the barriers to wider use of parallelism .
In additionto the algorithmic difficulties of irregular computations that characterize much of symbolic computation , there are barriers based on limitations of RAM in today 's hardware .
These hardware barriers aredemonstrably real .
A random access to RAM can cost more than 1,000 CPU cycles on the most recent architectures .
This affects symbolic algebra computations to a much greater extent than traditionalnumerical or commercial applications , which emphasize sequential access to RAM .
Even some non-parallel applications in symbolic algebra are shown to be primarily memory-bound ( bound by slowness of RAM ) , rather than CPU-bound , on current architectures .
This requires a revised , non-uniform complexity model of RAM .
AST 0204973ReynoldsAn accurate knowledge of interstellar matter and processes is crucial to understanding the cycle of stellar birth and death and the evolution of galaxies .
The Wisconsin H-Alpha Mapper ( WHAM ) , a remotely controlled Fabry-Perot facility dedicated to the detection and study of faint diffuse interstellar emission lines , has opened a new window to the interstellar medium by making it possible for the first time to explore the warm ionized phase of the gas with as much or moreaccuracy and detail as the other principal phases of the medium have been explored .
These opticalemission line studies provide unique new information about the nature of the interstellar mediumand the principal sources of ionization and heating within the disk and halo of the Galaxy , information that can not be obtained through other techniques at other wavelengths.Using the WHAM facility , Dr. Ronald Reynolds and his colleagues , at the University of Wisconsin , will carry out a comprehensive study of the variations in ionization and excitation conditions within the ionized gas and explore the strength and spectrum of the radiation field .
Their recently completed WHAM Northern Sky Survey has given the first comprehensive picture of the distribution and kinematics of this gas over the sky and thus provides the basic foundation for this investigation .
The complete set of survey data has been released to the community and is available through the website http//www.astro.wisc.edu/wham/ .
In this second phase of the program the investigators will observe fainter diagnostic emission lines to explore the nature of the new emission features discovered by the survey and to study the surprising differences in temperature and ionization state between this widespread , low-density phase of the interstellar medium and the bright , classical H II regions near hot stars .
From observations of faint emission lines of oxygen , nitrogen , sulfur , and helium , they will investigate the physical conditions of the diffusely emitting gas , the faint WHAM point sources , the enormous filaments and loops of ionized gas that reach 1000 pc or more from the Galactic midplane , and the relationship of the ionized gas to the warm neutral hydrogen phase of the medium .
By comparing these observations with those toward classical O star H II regions and extended regions of ionized gas associated with high latitude hot white dwarf stars , B stars , and supernova remnants , they will study the relationship between these known sources of ionization within the Galaxy and the warm ionized phase of the medium .
Observations of the intermediate and high velocity clouds will be used to trace the changing conditions in the ionized gas and radiation field from the Galactic midplane to the Galactic halo , while observations of H Beta/H Alpha will provide information about the influence of interstellar dust along the lines of sight of these optical line studies .
The ability of WHAM to carry out the observations of these and other faint emission lines was verified during the first phase of this program .
The diverse observational program in this second phase takes full advantage of this powerful , unique facility and will produce a substantial advancement in our understanding of interstellar matter and processes within the disk and halo of the Milky Way .
*** The adequate numerical treatment of nonlinear phenomenagoverned by partial differential equations with several disparatescales is a formidable computational challenge .
Modern algorithmsshould be able to resolve fine scales for certain physicalquantities without overresolving others , thereby optimizing thecomputational effort and making realistic 3d simulationsfeasible .
Epitaxial and crystal growth in materials science , andviscous incompressible fluids are typical yet quite distinctexamples addressed in this proposal .
The goal of this project isto design , test , and analyze reliable and efficient adaptivefinite element methods for such problems , with space-time errorcontrol and based on refinement/coarsening mesh modification.This project blends quite delicate analytical and computationalissues , and applies them to free boundary problems , constrainedproblems , geometric PDE and the Navier-Stokes equations ofincompressible fluids .
Scientific computing has joined theory and experiment toform together the three central aspects of scientific inquiry.The current strengths in computational mathematics draw on thewidespread acceptance of computational modeling as a complementto , and even a replacement for , physical tests in a broad numberof fields .
In this vein , the investigator develops reliable andefficient computational tools that may be useful in several areasof strategic importance such as nanotechnology , materialsscience , and high-performance computing .
This project is acollaborative endeavor , involving a number of scientists in theUS and abroad , as well as several students and postdocs .
Asubstantial effort is devoted to education and human resourcedevelopment .
Distributed , heterogeneous ( DH ) software systems are critical forthe operation of modern , globalized organizations .
Like all software , DH systems come under evolutionarypressure as organizational needs evolve .
Adapting DH systems to meet changing needs in areas such as security is challengingCo-ordinated changes , made in different languages , and on differentplatforms must still preserve type-safety , and must not increasecomplexity and/or complicate maintenance .
This project investigates enhancements to standards-based middleware ( e.g. , CORBA ) to support evolution.We preserve and enhance the core IDL-based heterogeneous philosophy of middleware .
First , interface-description language ( IDL ) , used to model the architecture-level interfaces of components , is enhanced to supportmodeling of the evolutionary changes made to a DH systems .
Locationof changes , types and life-times of new information to be created are all explicitly modeled in an aspect-oriented style at the IDL level .
Code generation supportsa wide range of implementation choices torealize these architectural change-models .
All implementationsare fully inter-operable .
Finally , change-modelsand implementations can be compononentized , packaged up and added to existing systems .
Like this research , our educational plans also spanseveral topics areas , including functional programming , object-orientation , and architecture .
We develop practically-grounded pedagogy on software evolution , comparing the varying approaches to separation of concerns inobject-orientation , higher-order polymorphism ( includingmonadic programming ) , connectors , and aspects .
Proposal ID DMS-0204232PI Feifang HuTitle Power , variability , and optimality in adaptive designsAbstractAdaptive designs use sequentially accruing data in allocation decisions to reach some objective .
In this proposal , the objective is based on an optimization criterion , such as minimizing the cost of an experiment .
The investigators use the power of a hypothesis test as a benchmark for comparisons of adaptive designs .
They explicitly derive the relationship between power and the design in terms of bias of the target allocation from the actual allocation and variation induced by the design .
For four classes of adaptive designs urn models , sequential maximum likelihood procedures , doubly adaptive biased coin designs , and treatment effect mappings , the investigators will uniquely unify the theory for easy comparison based on power , optimality , and variability.Adaptive designs are useful in many scientific disciplines and have application in clinical research , industrial experiments , bioassay , to name a few areas .
The idea is to dynamically use sequentially accruing data in decisions for collecting future data in order to satisfy some objective , which could be minimizing the cost of an experiment , maximizing expected treatment successes in a clinical trial , etc .
The use of adaptive designs can improve efficiency of an experiment by incorporating current knowledge into design decisions .
Heretofore what has been unknown is the relationship of variability of the adaptive designs to efficiency of the experiment .
The investigators will develop guidelines that will allow direct comparison of efficiency of designs by exploring their variability .
The grant will involve both undergraduate and graduate students across two campuses and will lead to increased understanding of how to efficiently design costly or ethically demanding experiments .
ABSTRACT0204377Shewchuk , JonathanU of Calif BerkeleyWe intend to develop fast , versatile , and visually accurate computational models for viscoplas-ticmaterials ranging from stiff , non-compliant solids to low viscosity fluids .
We are designingthese models for applications where visual realism , computation speed , and robustness are thepredominant requirements ( with numerical accuracy being subordinate ) .
Examples of suchapplications include real-time interactive training simulations ( e.g .
surgical simulation or haz-ardousduty simulations ) and off-line generation of visualizations ( e.g .
cinematic effects oraccident reenactment ) .To achieve this goal , we must develop fast , guaranteed-quality methods for generating and in-crementallyupdating unstructured ( irregular ) triangular and tetrahedral meshes .
Dynamically changing meshes are a necessity to model the complete range of viscoplastic materials , espe-cially where large deformations and mixing may occur .
Thus , the actions of the numerical simulation and the remeshing algorithms must be tightly integrated , especially if we wish to minimize errors due to interpolation and reinterpolation .
To ensure that our dynamic meshing algorithms and implementations are useful for other applications as well , we will develop a general methodology for communicating information between the numerical simulation andthe mesh generator .
ABSTRACT DMS - 0204650.We plan to study isoperimetric inequalities for Dirichlet eigenvalues ofbiharmonic operator in dimensions greater than 3 , for the sums of reciprocalsNeumann eigenvalues , for the Willmore functional of a surface , isoperimetricinequalities for Dirichlet Laplacian with Bonnesen type term.By isoperimetric inequality we mean any inequality relating two or more domainfunctionals ( defined on the same domain ) which is such that the equality signactually holds for some domain of the class under consideration ( or in someappropriate limiting sense ) .
There are still some open fundamental questions inthis classical area .
Safety analysis is essential for high-assurance software systems .
Safety analysis identifies the hazards , derives the software safetyrequirements to eliminate or control these hazards , and ensures that the designand implementation incorporate those safeguards .
A product line is aset of products that share a common set of features and a related market ormission.Currently , high-assurance product lines are being built without thetools or conceptual framework necessary to perform effective safety analyses .
This research addresses the question of how safety analysis canbecome a reusable asset of a product line by developing a framework and asuite of techniques for the safety analysis of critical product lines .
Anticipated benefits of the research include extending safety analyses toproduct lines , providing a framework for reuse of safety analyses within a product line , deriving formally specified limits on reuse of product-line safety analysis , and enabling safer product-line systems at lower cost and reduced schedules .
The results will be empirically evaluated by application inindustrial case studies .
This project will expand the opportunities available tostudent researchers to participate in development of safety-analysistechniques for product lines .
ABSTRACT DMS - 0204188.The principal investigator will seek analytic realizations of stringycohomology of singular varieties with trivial canonical bundle .
He will studythe implications of such analytic realizations ( and their generalizations ) towards providing new explanations of gauge symmetry enhancement mechanisms instring theory .
In collaboration with S. Sethi , the PI will continue his programto analyze the supersymmetric matrix model quantum mechanics which has been conjectured to provide a definition of M theory .
Graduate student G. Firestone , will study the L2 index theory for the nonFredholm Dirac operators whose L2kernels give the ground states for this theory .
Sethi and the PI will examinemethods for computing gravitational anomalies of field theories arising fromstring theories on singular spaces .
S. Paban , S. Sethi , and the PI will examinethe constraints imposed by supersymmetry on deformations of the supersymmetryalgebra associated to an isolated five brane .
The PI will investigate theextension of Witten 's spinor technique of proving the positive mass conjecture by replacing the hypothesis of a smooth spin structure by the assumption of a spin structure degenerating on a codimension 2 submanifold.M theory gives a potential framework for providing a physical theory whichincorporates both gravitation and the quantum physics describing high energy particles .
The precise form of this theory is not yet fully developed .
The measurable consequences are even further from being fully worked out .
This project attempts to determine , for branches of this theory , fundamental consequences , such as the number of particles of different types , when these particles combine to make more complex matter , and the size and shape of these particles and their combinations.In addition to developing the physical consequences of M and string theory , such computations can be used to check for potential errors in the underlying hypotheses of M theory .
This project also seeks a better understanding of amathematical model for the physical interactions between certain particles known as 5 branes , whose existence is predicted by M theory .
DMS-0204386Daniel Ruberman , Jerome Levine , and Kiyoshi Igusa The topology group at Brandeis University proposes research on knot theory and 3-manifolds , gauge-theory and 4-manifolds , and on higher Reidemeister torsion of families of manifolds .
Jerome Levine plans to continue his study of finite type invariants of 3-manifolds .
In particular , he plans to investigate a graphical interpretation of a new surgery-theoretic theory proposed in a recent paper .
He also will investigate various questions concerning boundary link invariants such as the signature-type invariant and the relationship between the Farber invariant and non-commutative Reidemeister torsion .
Daniel Ruberman 's research uses gauge theory to investigate the geometry and topology of 4-dimensional manifolds .
He will extend his program of using Seiberg-Witten theory and Yang-Mills theory to explore families of diffeomorphisms of 4-manifolds and positive scalar curvature metrics on a 4-manifold .
Further work explores whether finiteness theorems of Riemannian geometry hold in dimension 4 .
Seiberg-Witten and Donaldson theory will also be used to investigate a simple but important class of non-simply-connected 4-manifolds .
Kiyoshi Igusa 's work extends his study of higher Franz-Reidemeister torsion to the complex case and to various new spaces of graphs .
He will use this to interpret the Miller-Morita-Mumford classes in terms of the higher Franz-Reidemeister ( FR ) torsion.Our research encompasses a number of themes in geometry and topology .
One of these is the interplay between topology and algebra , and another is the interplay between topology and theoretical physics .
To study spaces or other topological objects such as knots , we encode some aspects of the space into familiar algebraic objects such as matrices or polynomials .
Some of the algebra used to study 3-dimensional objects is connected with ideas developed by physicists to understand quantum field theory , especially the Feynmann integral .
Investigating this interplay contributes to our understanding of the 3-dimensional world in which we live .
Part of our work is concerned with the evolution of spaces -- the study of the way in which they change as some parameter is varied .
Some of the research in this direction develops algebraic tools which apply in the case when there are many independent parameters .
Another component studies the evolution of 4-dimensional spaces and geometries , using techniques arising in gauge theory , a fundamental geometrical tool in theoretical physics .
Managing the energy consumption of computers requires cooperationbetween energy aware applications and operating systems .
Thisresearch seeks to fully explore the energy management spacesurrounding the interaction of applications and the operating system.Applications should adjust their energy consumption when appropriate , but must be provided accurate information on their individual energyconsumption .
The operating system must implement the mechanisms andpolicies to determine energy consumption and allocate it fairly as aglobal system resource.This research will first re-examine operating system structure with anemphasis on managing energy as a first class resource .
Energymanagement cuts across all traditional system resources , with the CPU , disk , network , and memory all exhibiting unique energy consumptioncharacteristics .
Next , the work will explore policies for allocatingenergy to competing tasks .
The goal is to maintain fairness whileobserving user-specified priorities and soft real-time deadlines.The end product of this research will be a comprehensive framework forglobally managing energy in a diverse set of scenarios , ranging from asingle mobile computer , to wireless sensor networks that may haveaggregate goals across a large number of sensors , to hosting centersthat wish to provide maximum performance with minimum energyconsumption .
ABSTRACT0204293Suneeta RamaswamiRugers U New BrunswickThe broad goal of this project is the complete development of robust algorithms for the modelingand visualization of data in a specific application domain , namely medical imaging .
The focus ofthe proposal is on the generation of quadrilateral and hexahedral meshes for medical data obtainedfrom structural studies ( MR and CT ) of human organs.The generation of good quadrilateral and hexahedral ( quad/hex ) meshes is not well-understoodand several important questions remain open .
By exploiting the geometry that is central to theseproblems , we aim to develop algorithms for generating guaranteed-quality surface and volumemeshes composed of quadrilateral and hexahedral elements .
Algorithmic techniques and data struc-tures from computational geometry will be utilized towards this end .
We also investigate adaptivequad/hex meshes , i.e. , meshes designed to have varying levels of refinement depending on factorssuch as the desired level of detail in a localized part of the input domain .
The algorithms will bedesigned for and tested on medical imaging data .
Improved surface and volume meshing algorithmswill directly impact automated clinical analysis of medical data , which is typically carried out byprocedures that require finite element simulations on discrete anatomical models .
Some examplesof such procedures are elastic matching and viscous uid ow .
Our work will be done in collabo-ration with researchers in the area of brain image analysis in the Department of Radiology at theUniversity ofPennsylvania .
A close relationship between linear elliptic and parabolic partial differential equations and Markov diffusion processes played an important role in the development of both fields during the last century .
A new chapter in this direction -- an interplay between a class of semilinear equations and superdiffusions -- has evolved over the past 15 or so years .
The theory has reached a certain stage of maturity .
However some key problems remain open ( for instance , the uniqueness of the solution with a given fine trace and the structure of exit boundaries of superdiffusions ) .
The work on these problems is the subject of the proposal .
Superdiffusions is a special class of branching measure-valued processes also known as superprocesses .
Outside of pure mathematics , they play a significant role in population genetics and they provide new tools for the study of complex physical systems with infinitely many degrees of freedom .
For about two decades these processes have attracted the efforts of many investigators around the world .
Effective processes are of fundamental importance to manufacturing , government , engineering , and management .
In all of these areas greaterunderstanding and control of key processes can lead to improvedeffectiveness .
For the past 15 years , it has also been recognized thatprocesses are fundamental to software development , and that effectivecontrol of processes can lead to similar benefits , such as improvedunderstanding , coordination , efficiency , and automation .
It has been hopedthat this would lead to reductions in software development cost , improvements in software product quality , and reductions in softwaredevelopment time .
Our hypothesis is that progress towards these goals canbe speeded by establishing a scientific basis upon which to build theprocess technologies that will support more effective software production.This research project will lead to the development of needed improvementsto the Little-JIL process definition language , and the Julietteinterpreter .
These improvements will be validated by programming andrunning multiuser , iterative software design processes that are effectivein integrating the activities of humans and computer automation .
Theseprocesses should be of considerable value in themselves .
Theirdevelopment , moreover , will sharpen and validate the Little-JIL processlanguage , resulting in clearer understandings of the underlyingrequirements for effective process definition languages .
High-speed circuits are highly pipelined , use latches as opposed to flip-flops , and practice extensive time borrowing to reduce overheads of pipelining .
Since speed is a critical objective , high quality delay testing , such as path delay testing , is imperative for such circuits .
Use of latches and extensive time borrowing have two important consequences that give rise to new problems in delay testing .
First , since the paths in one block interact with the paths in the blocks in its fan in and fan out , it becomes necessary to test for delay faults multi-block paths , i.e. , paths that traverse multiple blocks of a circuit .
The number of such paths is often astronomical .
Second , due to time borrowing , values at a latch output are not applied at any fixed time , but at some time within a range .
Since the exact time when values are applied at the outputs of a latch vary from vector to vector and from one fabricated copy of a chip to another , it is impossible to design design-for-testability ( DFT ) circuitry that mimics the timing of events during the normal mode of operation .
Two types of test application schemes are proposed that can be implemented using scan designs that do not try to mimic the timing of events during the circuit 's normal operation but apply values and capture responses at specific clock edges .
It is then proven that it is indeed possible to use such scan to precisely test , for path delay faults , latch based circuits that use time borrowing .
Techniques to use above DFT technique to efficiently test such high-speed circuits will be developed .
This will include development of a technique to generate optimal test plans as well as tools that can generate the types of tests and perform detailed design of DFT circuitry required by the proposed approach .
The proposed research will provide the first systematic approach for achieving , at reasonable costs , efficient testing for path delay faults in high speed circuits while providing provably high test quality .
The tools developed will be leveraged and extended for instructional purposes .
The ongoing work involves the analysis of the structural behavior of the Pentagon building on 11 September 2001 .
There are two poignant questions about the observed behavior of the building that deserve investigation1 .
Immediately upon impact of the Boeing 757 , the reinforced concrete building lost approximately 30 columns in the ground story .
Instead of an immediate collapse the structure remained standing to allow its occupants to be rescued .
What were the structural attributes that prevented progressive collapse ? 2 .
The Boeing 757 crashed into the building at a speed exceeding 750 ft/sec .
It had enormous kinetic energy .
The debris was stopped in 300 ft. What characteristics of the structure were the main factors in absorbing the energy ? The insights gained are made available a Group .
The final report will include the development of a web site containing the data and their studies .
Presentations are made at professional society meetings .
Over the past 40 years , substantial experimental and computational efforts have revealed the existence and importance of complex coherent structures in shear turbulence .
The nature and role of the coherent structures have remained subjects of debate at a qualitative level due to a lack of theoretical understanding and foundation for these structures .
However , the gap between theory and experiments is closing thanks to recent discoveries of three-dimensional traveling wave solutions of the Navier-Stokes equations that are best described as exact coherent structures .
This research will continue the study and characterization of these rich solutions in plane shear flows and seek to elucidate the connections between their instabilities and the disorder that is characteristic of turbulence .
The approach is that of bifurcation and dynamical systems theory applied to the nonlinear partial differential equations of hydrodynamics .
Extensions of these traveling wave solutions to pipe flow and mixing layers will be considered.Shear turbulence is an ubiquitous phenomenon that occurs in the flow of simple fluids , such as air and water , and the more complex fluids that arise in biological and industrial processes .
Turbulence has an enormous impact on the properties of fluid flows , such as the transport of momentum and energy and the mixing of chemicals in combustion , manufacturing and the environment .
However , the complexity of turbulent flows severely limits our ability to predict the properties of fluid flows .
This research promises to provide a fundamental understanding of the nature of shear turbulence thanks in large part to high-performance scientific computing .
A database of the exact coherent structures mentioned above will be developed and posted on the Internet .
This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biological Informatics for FY2002 .
The fellowship supports research and training at the postdoctoral level at the intersection of biology and the informational , computational , mathematical , and statistical sciences .
The goal of the fellowship is to provide training to a young scientist in preparation for a career in biological informatics in which research and education will be integrated .
There is an increasing need for training in biological informatics at all occupational levels , and it is expected that Fellows trained through these fellowships will play important roles in training the future workforce.The research and training plan for this fellowship is entitled Inferring evolutionary importance of genes from the shapes of multi-species gene genealogies .
It is predicted that loci causally involved in divergences of incipient species have gene trees that are monophyletic within species and concordant with species phylogenies .
This research develops coalescent-based probabilistic models to describe shapes of multi-species gene genealogies .
These models are being applied to genomic sequence data to identify loci potentially involved in species divergences .
AbstractDMS-0204869PI Hans-Georg MuellerTitle Nonparametric and Semi-parametric Models for High Dimensional DataThe investigator will focus on statistical models , theory , algorithms and applications geared towards the analysis of high-dimensional and in particular functional data .
Semiparametric methods are particularly appropriate for such data since usually little is known about the structure of these data , while at the same time a dimension reduction step is necessary in order to avoid the curse of dimension .
Dimension reduction in the form of projections by fitting single index or multiple index models , or by truncating the number of terms included in an expansion of functional data , is therefore a major emphasis of this project .
Another emphasis of this project are statistical methods that take into account that curve data often are random curves that are subject to individually varying time scales .
This leads to models , theory , methodology and algorithms for time warping of functional data .
Curve data are abundant in genetics where dissemination of gene expression profiles is of highest interest and also in the field of aging and mortality .
The investigator will develop methods for functional regression , correlation , discriminant and cluster analysis .
These methods will provide tools to establish relationships between random functions and allow classification of observed sample curves into distinct categories.Large and increasingly complex data that are being collected in scientific and other experimental and observational studies are often data that may be viewed as curves or functions .
Such data often contain valuable information about the time-dynamics of physical and biological phenomena , and advance statistical techniques are needed to extract it .
For example , recordings of repeated cDNA expression data with genetic microarrays may contain valuable information about the dynamics of gene activation patterns and gene regulation .
Other examples where such data play a major role concern the relationship between reproduction and aging , the dynamic structure of aging and longevity , or the relationship between various blood proteins that are recorded continuously .
The investigator will develop statistical methods and models specifically designed for the analysis and interpretation of such data .
Software systems evolve over time in order to adapt to changes inenvironment .
Graceful software evolution requires that only expectedchanges in functionality occur ; while desirable , this is difficult toachieve .
Software tools are needed to automate the evolution ofcomplex software systems containing heterogeneous components , byreporting change impact information to programmers , allowingexamination of the effects of code edits .
Tool support for changeimpact analysis has a clear potential to boost programmer productivityand enable safe code enhancement.This research in change impact analysis assumes that anobject-oriented system is developed with a suite of tests , run as thesystem is updated to check the safety of changes .
Analyses candetermine which tests are affected and which changes affect each ofthese tests .
Since these tests often exercise independentfunctionalities , the tests affected correspond to thosefunctionalities that may have been altered .
This research will developan interactive tool for change impact analysis of Java , as part of aindustrial-strength programming environment to ensure practicality.The tool will allow experimentation with the granularity of changesand program representations , incrementalization of the analyses , collection of a Java benchmark suite , and application to collaborativesoftware development .
ABSTRACT DMS - 0204725 .
PI Qiu-Dong WangThis research proposal is mainly on the subject of non-uniformlyhyperbolic strange attractors .
We propose to apply an abstract setting we previously formulated and studied to rigorously provethe existence of non-uniformly hyperbolic strange attractorsin certain systems of ordinary differential equations , including a modifiedsystem of van der Pol and certain periodically excited systems experiencingHopf bifurcations .
We also propose to analytically establish the fact thatnon-uniformly hyperbolic strange attractors naturally arise whenan asymptotically stable periodic solution of a given systemof ordinary differential equations is periodically excited by genericexternal forcing .
These non-uniformly hyperbolic strange attractors have properties that include most of standard mathematical notions associatedwith chaos positive Liapunov exponents , positive entropy , SRB measure , exponential decay of correlation , nice symbolic coding of orbits etc.We also propose to study the geometric structure of the integral manifoldof the spatial four-body problem.This research proposal is mainly on the subject of non-uniformly hyperbolic strange attractors .
In general an attractor is a state to which a system will eventually evolve .
One of the most important way of studying systems in nature is to first model then study them as solutions of certain differential equations .
We propose to apply a theory we previously developed to prove the existence of a class of strange attractors in some systems of differential equations arisen from various scientific disciplines including in the studies of turbulence , fluid mechanics and plasma mechanics .
The attracting states we propose to study have very complicated dynamical properties and sophisticated geometric structures .
They were observed inmany numerical and laboratory experiments but their existence were rarely established mathematically in the past .
We also propose to study the geometricstructure of the integral manifold of the spatial four-body problem .
This is a long standing mathematical problem with potential applications on orbit designfor artificial celestial objects .
0204308HislopThis award supports graduate students from US universities to participate in a special program on partial differential equations and spectral theory at the Mittag-Leffler Institute in Djursholm , Sweden .
The workshop will provide a unique opportunity for young mathematicians to develop collaborations with their counterparts from Sweden , as well as with leaders in the field from all of Scandinavia .
The theme of the program is the interaction between partial differential equations and spectral theory , and applications to microlocal analysis and Schrodinger operators .
The Mittag-Leffler Institute is a world-renowned mathematics research institute located near Stockholm .
The Institute has a research building with offices , conference room , and up-to-date library , and apartments for researchers are located on campus .
As a result , the Institute is an ideal place for in-depth and collaborative mathematical study and provides an optimal milieu for fostering collaboration .
The Fall 2002 Program is the third such program on differential equations and spectral theory held at the Institute , two others having been held in 1982 and 1992 .
DMS-0204158Thang LeThang Le plans to continue his study of quantum and finite typeinvariants of links and 3-manifolds .
In particular , he would liketo study problems arising around the volume conjecture whichconnects quantum invariants to classical objects like fundamentalgroups , torsions , and volumes .
Other problems involve integralityproperties ( in broad sense ) of quantum invariants and thetopology behind them , and their applications .
The field hasinteractions with geometry , combinatorics , number theory , andphysics.The theory of knots and 3-manifolds is an old branch ofmathematics which has gained renewed interest amongmathematicians and physicists after the discovery of the Jonespolynomial and its relation to theoretical physics ( quantum fieldtheory , high energy physics ) .
In fact , it is now one of the mostactive domains in mathematics .
Many results of knot theory mayalso find applications in molecular biology .
To classify knotsand 3-manifolds , mathematicians use invariants .
This researchproject studies new classes of invariants of knots and3-manifolds and their relationships with the classical ones .
Thenew invariants are very powerful in distinguishing knots and3-manifolds .
This research involves several topics in the theory and application of interacting particle systems .
These processes are stochastic models for large systems of interacting components .
Among the phenomena these systems model are competition of species , epidemics , spread of genetic traits , catalytic chemical reactions , and more .
The investigator will pursue research on several specific problems .
The first project involves the mutually catalytic branching process , which models the evolution of two populations whose growth rates depend on one another .
The second project concerns the relationship between low density interacting particle systems and measure-valued diffusions , especially the convergence of rescaled versions of the former to super-Brownian motion .
The third project treats some questions from mathematical genetics , especially limiting results for the stepping stone model on the two dimensional integer lattice .
In the fourth project a class of generalized branching random walks is considered .
The key to resolving the main question of local extinction versus stability for this class appears to be the analysis of a particular case with a certain minimal branching rate which takes a form not previously considered .
This research involves several topics in the theory and application of interacting particle systems or stochastic spatial processes .
The goal of this research is to obtain a better qualitative understanding of various complex phenomena that interacting particle systems model well .
These are large systems made up of many interacting components , usually with a stochastic or random element .
For example , a simple model for the evolution of a genetic trait through a spatially distributed population fits into this framework .
It incorporates the movement of individuals across spatially distributed colonies , and mutation at a small rate .
The investigator hopes to show that this type of model can give more accurate results than the traditional , simpler non-spatial models widely used .
Part of the proposed research concerns very specific models and questions such as this one , and part of the proposed research will aim at developing general mathematical techniques for handling models of this type .
DMS-0204707William H. JacoThis project involves the development and use of efficienttriangulations in the study and understanding of 3 -- manifolds .
Atriangulation of a 3-manifold determines a class of surfaces in the3 -- manifold called normal surfaces .
A fundamental observation is that in most cases when a 3 -- manifold contains an interesting surface , then forany triangulation of the 3 -- manifold the same interesting feature isexhibited by a normal surface in the triangulation .
This has provided apowerful method for studying 3-manifolds and solving certain decisionproblems .
Normal surface theory has , for example , lead to the theoreticalresolution of determining when two 3 -- manifolds , which contain injectivesurfaces , are homeomorphic , to the classification of these same manifolds , and to the determination of whether a knot in the three-sphere is theunknot .
However , even with the presence of interesting normal surfaces , agiven triangulation may have numerous uninteresting normal surfaces , whichmake theoretical arguments quite tedious and computational attempts nearlyimpossible .
The guiding principle of efficient triangulations is reducingunnecessary normal surfaces and improving the efficiency of computationsfor triangulation based algorithms .
They have exhibited remarkablesuccess in doing this .
However , more surprisingly , efficienttriangulations have exposed interesting relations between one-vertex andideal triangulations of three-manifolds and new combinatorial structures , which seem to be intimately related to the topology of the three-manifold.This project will explore efficient triangulations with particularemphasis of their application to the Homeomorphism Problem/ClassificationProblem for three-manifolds and issues of computational complexity.Low-dimensional topology brings together many areas of mathematicalresearch and provides a common ground for interaction and advance acrossall of mathematics .
It provides a natural geometric model of most physicalphenomena .
Research in this area is making significant contribution tocomputational geometry and topology and complexity theory .
It hasconsequences in physics , computer visualization and medical and biologicalmodeling .
This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biological Informatics for FY2002 .
The fellowship supports research and training at the postdoctoral level at the intersection of biology and the informational , computational , mathematical , and statistical sciences .
The goal of the fellowship is to provide training to a young scientist in preparation for a career in biological informatics in which research and education will be integrated .
There is an increasing need for training in biological informatics at all occupational levels , and it is expected that Fellows trained through these fellowships will play important roles in training the future workforce.The research and training plan for this fellowship is entitled New procedures for modelling the thermal environment of small animals .
The spatial and temporal distribution of thermal resources across landscapes influences the abundance and distribution of organisms .
Existing techniques to evaluate thermal habitats do not adequately represent the complexity of most environments .
Novel procedures are being developed to generate detailed , dynamic , thermal maps using artificial neural networks that incorporate thermographic imaging and microclimate data .
DMS-0204634Richard HindOne can associate to a smooth manifold a symplectic structureon its cotangent bundle , and to a real-analytic Riemannian manifolda canonical complex structure on a domain inside its cotangent bundle.This project will continue work of the investigator studying thesesymplectic and complex structures .
A broad aim is to discover howclosely the symplectic geometry relates to the smooth structure onthe original manifold , and how the complex geometry reflects theRiemannian properties .
Also , since much symplectic infomation iscontained in properties of compatible complex structures , it is alsointeresting to relate the symplectic and complex geometry .
Cotangentbundles are the simplest examples of symplectic manifolds , yet manyfundamental problems in symplectic geometry are still elusive inthese cases .
The investigator will conduct research into theuniqueness of symplectic structures and of isotopy classes ofLagrangian submanifolds .
The complex manifolds we study arisenaturally in many branches of mathematics , notably algebraic geometryand representation theory .
Important aspects of their geometryremain to be understood , together with analytical problems whichshould have applications to number theory .
Symplectic geometry originated as the modern mathematicallanguage of classical and quantum mechanics .
It is now an excitingarea of pure mathematical research , but continues to benefit fromcurrent physical ideas .
Since the eighties it has been clear thatmuch insight into symplectic geometry can also be gained fromstudying compatible complex structures .
Fortunately the study ofcomplex geometry has long been a main focus of mathematics .
Thisproject will conduct research into both symplectic and complexgeometry , focussing on interactions between the two .
The specificobjects of study arise as the first examples of symplecticmanifolds , and as examples of complex manifolds occuring frequentlyin many branches of mathematics and theoretical physics .
This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Microbial Biology for FY2002 .
The fellowship supports training and research on the basic biology of protozoan , microalgal , fungal , archaeal , bacterial and viral species that are not generally considered to be model organisms .
Further , it provides opportunities for a recent doctoral recipients to obtain additional training in microbial biology , to gain research experience under the sponsorship of established scientists , and to broaden his/her scientific horizons beyond the research experiences during the undergraduate and graduate training .
These fellowships are further designed to assist new scientists to direct their research efforts across traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves of unique research resources , sites , and facilities , including foreign locations .
The research and training plan is entitled Microarray analysis to discover light-quality regulated genes in the cyanobacteria Fremyella diplosiphon .
Microarrays allow researchers to analyze global gene expression .
Fremyella diplosiphon has an adaptive response to light color called complementary chromatic adaptation ( CCA ) .
However , only three operons have been identified as regulated by light color .
This research uses microarrays of PCR amplified genomic fragments to discover novel genes that are light color regulated and then uses gene-specific microarrays to examine the expression kinetics of these genes .
DMS-0204576Kevin M. WhyteThis project is concerned with several aspects of large scale geometry and topology .
One of the main points of study is the problem of producing actions from quasi-actions , along the lines of the classical theorems of Sullivan andTukia .
Such results have significant implications in the quasi-isometric classification of groups , especially for groups with natural splittings as a complex of groups .
A second area of study is large scale versions of rigidityphenomena in the geometry of symmetric spaces , and specifically the classification of quasi-isometric embeddings between symmetric spaces , giving a geometric analogue of superrigidity .
A third and independant project involves coarse versions of topological rigidity , including the coarse Borel , Novikov , and Baum-Connes conjectures .
Roughly speaking , large scale ( or coarse ) geometry is the study of geometric properties of objects seen from far away .
From this perspective , any bounded object is indistinguishable from a point , and a line of dots is indistinguishable from a solid line .
This sort of geometry has been influencial recently in many areas of mathematics , notably group theory , topology , and geometric analysis .
Thisresearch will explore the large scale geometry of several classes of mathematical objects , both classical geometric spaces and objects only now being viewed in a geometric manner .
Proposal Number DMS-0204081 PI Kuperbeg ABSTRACTResearch will be conducted on continuous dynamical systems onmanifolds of dimension three and higher , with emphasis on compact invariant subsets on which the flow is minimal .
Continuing the work related to the real analytic solution to the Seifert conjecture on aperiodic flows acting on the three-dimensional sphere , the PI plans to classify the minimal sets in such flows with respect to their homological and shape theory properties .
Minimal sets shape-equivalent ( in the senseof Borsuk ) to a polyhedron often appear in flows asattractors , and are of special interest .
Minimal sets of non-polyhedral shape are usually approximated by circular orbits or by other movable sets with the so called UV-property.They have very complicated dynamics around them , which can be investigated through the structure of the family of the approximating invariant sets .
Circular orbits are extremelyimportant in celestial mechanics as they appear as paths of movement .
Smaller particles , dust , can align along a braided orbit , and in the continuous case , in a mathematical model , this orbit could be an invariant set , aperiodic but circle-like , or graph-like such as the well-known Denjoy continua .
A volume-preserving dynamical system , associated with incompressible fluids , imposes restrictions on the flow outside the special invariant collection and is an important area of study as well .
The theory of dynamical systems was developed in an effort toprovide a mathematically rigorous description of real physical phenomena .
It is therefore closely connected to many domains of science mechanics , various areas of physics , biology , and economics .
Dynamical systems connect several branches of mathematics such as analysis , topology , geometry , algebra , and combinatorics .
This research addresses the creation of efficient algorithms for incrementally re-placing and re-routing small portions of a VLSI circuit to correct problems such as signal integrity , speed and high heat density that have been discovered therein via simulation .
The challenge is to quickly re-layout only the affected portion of the circuit , while minimizing any layout changes of the much larger unaffected part of the circuit in order to capitalize on the enormous resources and time already spent on the physical design of the chip , to retain the already optimized features of the design , and to meet time-to-market requirements.Algorithms for both regular VLSI chips and field-programmable gate arrays ( FPGAs ) are being addressed in this project .
For the incremental placement problem , a min-cost network-flow based algorithm is being investigated using both deterministic and probabilistic edge costs .
In the incremental routing realm , the following areas are being researched ( a ) Algorithms for constraint-driven bump-and-refit ( this allows exploration of solution spaces with different sets of constraints like upper bounds on the increase in net lengths and/or delays , on the number of vias , and on crosstalk coupling ) .
( 2 ) Performing incremental global and detailed routing in one consolidated framework in order to obtain better optimized routings .
( 3 ) Incremental Satisfiability ( SAT ) methods and their application to incremental routing .
( 4 ) Various additional issues and solution techniques needed for incremental routing of VLSI circuits .
0204779Despite the importance of a whole spectrum of knowledge from general thinking strategies to specific content in scientists ' thinking , most science instructors focus their courses only on content knowledge and neglect to equip students with appropriate thinking strategies .
Thus , it is not surprising that students often gain factual and procedural knowledge , but are unable to link and use these ideas to solve novel problems , give coherent explanations , or construct a principled understanding of science .
This is unfortunate because , without these abilities , science content knowledge is practically useless to students .
On the other hand , understanding of the fundamental principles and thinking strategies of science fosters independent science learning and problem solving .
Research in cognitive science and education illustrates that instructors can promote better understanding by explicitly teaching students to use thinking strategies that experts use implicitly.Metacognition refers to the monitoring and regulation of one 's own thoughts , and includes the use of both general and domain-specific thinking strategies .
An example of a general thinking strategy is evaluating new ideas by comparing them with other things you know about to see if the ideas fit together and make sense to you .
A strategy that is more specific to the domain of chemistry is making connections between macroscopic observations and molecular-level explanations .
Research has shown that high levels of metacognition are key for understanding ideas and for problem solving .
While it is clear that metacognition contributes favorably to learning , many open questions about its specific role remain.With funding from a PFSMETE starter grant , I propose to continue my research regarding metacognition and chemistry learning .
First , I propose to use funds from this starter grant to provide a bridge between my PFSMETE postdoctoral work and plans for larger-scale dissemination and study of student learning in the laboratory via the MORE Thinking Frame .
Thus , a major focus of this project will be to study the use of the MORE Thinking Frame as implemented by a graduate student instructor who has never used the tool before and the student learning that results from such an implementation .
Second , of the three arenas in which chemistry is taught at the college level ( lecture , laboratory , and recitation ) , by far the most challenging context in which to promote student metacognition is that of the large lecture class .
Thus , the second major focus of this project will be to develop and study instructional methods that can be used to promote student metacognition during a lecture period.I expect that the research and development activities of this project will result in information about how to best design and disseminate metacognitive methods and materials , including an understanding of how use of such innovative methods may be sustained in different instructional contexts ; valuable professional development opportunities for graduate students involved in the project ; and improved metacognitive abilities , understanding of chemistry ideas and problem solving abilities for students .
Overall , the proposed research can be expected to advance understandings of methods for promoting and assessing metacognition in chemistry courses , the cognitive mechanisms underlying chemistry learning , and approaches to the design of more effective learning environments .
DMS-0204191 PI Georgios DaskalopoulosThe PI proposes three projects .
In the first , the PI proposes tostudy regularity of harmonic maps into the completion of Teichmuellerspace .
The two main applications are on symplectic Lefschetz pencilsand on superrigidity of lattices in the mapping class group .
In thesecond project the PI proposes a proof of higher dimensional partialanalogues of the conjectures of Atiyah and Bott on Yang-Millsequations over Riemann surfaces .
These are nontrivialgeneralizations to higher dimensions of the PI 's previous work on theconnection between Yang-Mills and the theory of holomorphic vectorbundles .
Finally in the third project the PI proposes some questionsabout harmonic maps from three-dimensional manifolds to trees whichgeneralize the well-known theory of harmonic maps from surfaces.The motivation for the first project is to use harmonic maps in orderto understand analytically the results of Kaimanovich-Masur andFarb-Masur on the superrigidity of lattices of rank at least 2 in themapping class group .
In the process the PI realized that the methodsshould also shed light in the rank one case .
The second projectshows that there are still very close connections between theanalysis of the Yang-Mills equations and algebraic geometry .
Theseconnections have been exploited in great detail by several people inthe case of Riemann surfaces but very little is known in higherdimensions .
The PI 's work sheds some light in this direction .
AbstractPI Jianqing FanDMS-0204329The objectives of this proposal are to develop new and widely applicable approaches for semiparametric and nonparametric estimation and inferences , to study theoretical properties of these new approaches , and to evaluate their efficacy in data analyses .
This proposal not only introduces a number of innovative techniques , but also provides various new and deep insights into statistical foundation .
It will have significant impact on the future research of statistical methodologies , computation and theories .
In particular , three inter-related areas are proposed for study .
Firstly , a family of flexible semiparametric and nonparametric models is introduced .
This allows one to study the extent to which response variables are associated with their covariates .
The generalized likelihood ratio statistics is proposed for testing various hypotheses in multivariate semiparametric and nonparametric models .
Secondly , new semiparametric and nonparametric models are proposed for understanding interest-rate dynamics , and stock price volatilities .
Furthermore , the information on state-domain is incorporated to improve the efficiency of volatility estimation for bonds and to more accurately estimate the market risks of a portofolio .
Thirdly , new techniques for variable selection , in the presence of a large number of variables , are proposed via nonconcave penalized likelihood .
The innovation is that they estimate parameters and select variables simultaneously .
The above techniques are widely applicable to many scientific and engineering problems .
Multivariate nonparametric , semiparametric and large parametric models have been widely used .
Statistical questions often arise such as if certain variables or factors are important to public health ; if some risk factors contribute significantly to the survival time of patients ; and if interest-rate dynamics or stock price processes are time-dependent or follow certain famous hypotheses , among others .
Yet , there are no generally applicable tools available to answer these questions in multivariate semiparametric and non-saturated nonparametric models .
The techniques proposed here permit one to objectively test scientific hypotheses without restrictive model assumptions .
The techniques allow to better price financial derivatives and manage investment risk , to identify important risk variables and their possible interactions in the analysis of large epidemiological studies and to scrutinize famous hypotheses on stock prices Proposal DMS-0204149PI Guillermo GoldszteinInstitution Georgia Institute of TechnologyTitle Mechanical and electrical properties of heterogeneous solidsThis project focuses on two problems related to heterogeneous materials ( 1 ) the effect of texture and grain anisotropy on the strength of polycrystals , and ( 2 ) the electrical properties of high-contrast matrix-particulate composites .
The investigation involves analysis of the mathematical models as well as numerical computations.In most applications , crystalline materials are used in polycrystalline form .
Polycrystals of the same material but with different textures may exhibit different behavior .
One goal of the present research project is to gain a better understanding of the dependence of the behavior of polycrystals on their texture .
Better understanding will lead to better guidelines for materials selection and processing procedures .
A second goal of this project is to contribute to a better understanding of composite materials -- -materials composed of two or more integrated pure phases .
In general , a composite has better properties than the pure phases alone .
Examples of composite materials are plastics that are reinforced with glass fibers or glass particles the result is a much stronger and stiffer material .
The results of this project will be useful for the design of composite materials with specific properties .
0243896 SchwartzThis award funds a five-year Research Experience for Undergraduates ( REU ) Site at the University of Colorado Boulder for fifteen students each summer for research opportunities in the area of functional materials .
The principal objective of this program will be to encourage promising students , particularly those from population groups underrepresented in research fields in engineering and those from primarily undergraduate institutions , to pursue graduate studies in preparation for a career in engineering research .
The program will include ( 1 ) a student poster competition to encourage students to present their research at subsequent technical meetings ; ( 2 ) a provision to pay travel expenses related to making presentations ; ( 3 ) a recruiting strategy to improve student diversity that involves a partnership with CU-Boulder 's Multicultural Engineering Program ; ( 4 ) a seminar program that focuses on preparing students to do research ; ( 5 ) a meaningful program of social and cultural activities designed to complement research activities ; and ( 6 ) a program evaluation and follow-up survey to gauge the program 's effectiveness .
Students will conduct research targeted at the synthesis and characterization of novel materials with specified properties .
The materials of interest will be aligned with the expertise of participating faculty and will include nanomaterials , biomaterials , catalysts , polymers , gels , ceramics , thin films , and membranes .
The auroras are characterized not only be a variety of active optical emissions , but by a wide variety of radio emissions as well .
The relationship between different optical features and different radio features , however , is poorly understood .
Wave phenomena in the auroral regions play an important role in the energy flow between the magnetosphere and the ionosphere .
In order to understand the relationships between optical and radio phenomena in the auroral region it is necessary to monitor the region with a variety of instruments .
This project will utilize data from optical imaging instruments , radar backscatter from auroral features , and plasma wave , electric field , magnetic field and particle measurements from satellites crossing the auroral regions .
Satellites which will be used in the study include the defense department DMSP satellites , NASA 's FAST , WIND , POLAR , SAMPEX , and IMAGE satellites , and the European CLUSTER mission .
A ground-based radio imaging system will be used to locate the regions producing auroral Medium Frequency ( MF ) radio emissions .
The investigation will also contribute to studies of the timing and location of magnetic substorm onsets .
The radio imaging instruments will be deployed at existing facilities in Alaska and Greenland .
The data will be made available to all researchers , including those using the Alaska and Greenland facilities .
The research project will also be integrated with educational activities being carried out by the three collaborating institutions ( Dartmouth College , Siena College , and the Univ .
of Alaska ) .
In particular the educational effort at Dartmouth will include a focus toward the Dartmouth Women-in Science-Program ( WISP ) .
Students will be involved with both the engineering aspects of the new instrumentation as well as the analysis of the resulting scientific data .
This action provides partial support for the study by the National Research Council Assessing the Performance of Surface and Subsurface Engineered Barriers .
These systems are relied upon to retain fluids in heap leach treatment in mining , to ensure safe disposal of a variety of waste , to complement remediation programs for contaminated sites , and for other applications .
Recent advances in technology and understanding , as well as assessment of past barrier performance , provide an opportunity to improve upon current design , evaluation , and monitoring methods.Surface and subsurface containment systems include caps , bottom liners , and vertical barriers constructed with a variety of materials , e.g. , concrete , geomembranes , compacted clays .
This study will develop and describe an improved framework for assessing surface and subsurface engineered barriers .
In 1997 , the National Research Council completed a workshop report , Barrier Technologies for Environmental Management ( NRC , 1997 ) .
The workshop discussions focused on several themes .
The current study will build on some of these themes and will provide an improved components-based framework for assessing engineered barriers .
It will be conducted by an ad hoc committee under the aegis of the Committee on Geological and Geotechnical Engineering , a standing committee under the Board on Earth Sciences and Resources .
The ad hoc committee will consist of approximately 10 professionals with expertise in areas such as municipal/hazardous/radioactive waste containment ; hydrogeology ; environmental engineering ; mining ; geochemistry ; geotechnical/geological engineering ; instrumentation/sensor technology ; geology ; risk assessment ; and environmental regulation.The ad hoc panel will consider the performance and effective lifetimes of current and emerging types of engineered barriers and will summarize the state of science and engineering for risk assessment methodology , system installation , performance monitoring , and sustainability .
In addition , the study will identify data gaps and research needs .
This study will benefit operators and regulators by defining the key components of design and implementation that define barrier performance effective lifetimes , thereby helping to ensure protection of public health , reduce potential risks for barrier failure , maximize reliability of systems , and minimize overall costs .
In addition , the study 's assessment of data gaps will help to focus research programs on efforts that will most directly result in improved performance .
The study report will be available for public distribution in accordance with NRC policy , and will also be posted on the NAS World Wide Web site .
Not Available ABSTRACTThe objective of this exploratory project is to develop and evaluate a system to extract , categorize , and analyze awards focused on nanoscale science and engineering .
The PI will explore methods based on knowledge data discovery techniques to advance the state-of-the-art for extracting , analyzing , understanding , and digesting information about a complex research area from large semi-structured data .
The areas of focus will be on discovery of topics and research trends and classification of data with respect to the topics under consideration .
For the test case , the abstracts of 250,000 NSF awards available on the web will be used as the overall data where both technical merit as well as broader impact will be analyzed .
This project follows 300 urban women workers in Bangladesh from 2003-2005 in order to assess the impact of global and national economic changes on their types of employment , income-earning strategies , and empowerment .
This research uses quantitative and qualitative methods to generate individual level data during a period of rapid change in global trade to answer two general questions First , what are the macro and individual level determinants of Bangladeshi women 's work histories and their shifts to another sector , staying in the same sector , or migrating abroad ?
Second , what are the effects of women 's work within a particular sector , sector shifts , and work history on their empowerment ( resources , agency , and outcomes ) ?
Data are drawn from annual surveys and quarterly follow-up interviews that explore women 's background characteristics , work , family , migration and life activities .
These methods generate work interval and duration data used in life table and hazard models to estimate dynamic models that reflect international , national , and individual determinants of women 's work and moves among different types of formal , informal , and household work over two years .
The analyses estimate probabilities of women staying in one work area and/or their moves to other work that occurred during changes in trade rules , an important issue for policy makers who seek solutions to unemployment .
This research evaluates the competing claims of World Bank and other researchers such as Ward , Pyle , Carr , Chen , Pearson , and Kabeer on the effects of economic restructuring and economic development on women workers .
This project 's broader impacts lie in its potential contribution to economic policy makers , women 's rights groups , and scholars interested in understanding the consequences of global restructuring for women , families , and countries that depend on garment work ; the project also will provide opportunities for international faculty collaboration and student training in the U.S. and Bangladesh .
Combinational logic equivalence checking is used extensively in various formal verification approaches .
Problems can be encountered when the candidate functions are too large to be represented in the memory of a computer .
This motivates the need for probabilistic approaches for equivalence checking .
This project is an exploration of performing probabilistic equivalence checking based on the Haar spectrum of two partially represented functions .
Subsets of Haar spectral coefficients are obtained from partial Haar spectral diagrams efficiently .
The probability that two logic functions differ can be iteratively refined as additional pairs of Haar spectral coefficients with equal numeric value are calculated .
The problem of representation of very large functions is addressed through the use of the partial Haar spectral diagram and the probabilistic aspect arises through the use of iteratively refining the error probability as more matching pairs of spectral coefficients are found .
The use of the Haar wavelet is desirable as compared to other transforms since certain subsets of the coefficients are mutually independent which greatly reduces the complexity of the probability calculations .
0243994 AbolmaaliThis award provides funding for a three-year Research Experience for Undergraduates ( REU ) Site at the University of Texas at Arlington ( UTA ) for six students per year during eight weeks in the summer to conduct hands-on laboratory and field research in structural , geotechnical , and construction engineering .
Each student will work with one of four small research teams focusing on ( 1 ) The Seismic Performance of Partially Restrained Connections , ( 2 ) Repair Performance Evaluation of Fiber-Reinforced Polymer Composites , ( 3 ) Novel Measurements in a Geotechnical Engineering Laboratory , and ( 4 ) Residential Foundation Repair Methodology .
The REU experience is designed such that the students experience the research process through developing improved materials and testing procedures ; manufacturing and testing structural components and systems ; collecting and analyzing field data ; collecting and analyzing data using state-of-the-art laboratory measurement techniques ; and writing and presenting papers .
Each research team will include faculty members from the Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering at UTA and industry-based professional advisory members of the Construction Research Center at UTA .
Both formative and summative assessment and evaluation of the REU Site will be performed .
Outreach to local K-12 schools by the principal investigator to inform local students and teachers about REU Site activities , along with involvement of local K-12 math and science teachers in biweekly REU site meetings will be done to encourage students to consider enrolling in civil and environmental programs after high school and to promote professional development of K-12 math and science teachers .
AbstractProposal CHE-023531 Date 1-03-2003PI Dea Institution Occidental College The Chemistry Division award supports a Research Experiences for Undergraduates ( REU ) site at Occidental College for the summers of 2003-2005 .
Phoebe K. Dea is the site 's program director .
Six faculty members from the chemistry department will serve as REU mentors to eight students , who will each participate in a ten-week program .
Half of the students will be recruited from local community colleges .
The proposed research projects range from biophysical chemistry , to organic synthesis , to biochemistry , to advanced materials research .
The program will have weekly research seminars , student presentations , several social events and a final week College-wide poster session and oral presentations .
0243764 KhokharDescription This award supports a US-Pakistan Workshop on Information Technology to be held in Islamabad , Pakistan , April 2003 .
The organizers are Dr. Ashfaq Khokhar , Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science at the University of Illinois at Chicago and Dr. S.M .
Junaid Zaidi , Rector of the COMSATS ( Commission on Science and Technology for Sustainable Development in the South ) Institute of Information Technology in Islamabad , Pakistan .
The purpose of the workshop is to exchange information between the US and Pakistani sides on advances in information technology and to discuss R & D needs that may be met through cooperative research projects .
The key areas chosen for this workshop include role of IT in large scale enterprise infrastructure , security and protection of IT infrastructure , network centric information and computing , IT based applications including digital government , e-commerce , e-learning and bioinformatics , and higher education and research in IT .
Several parallel sessions will be organized to make use of the expertise of expatriate and other US-based leading researchers .
The workshop will include plenary sessions to introduce cutting edge research in each of the four identified areas , and two panel sessions to discuss future research trends in IT .
The workshop will provide a platform for fostering research collaborations among the researchers from US and Pakistan and initiate research and development projects related to key IT research areas .
Scope This project enables US and Pakistani scientists to discuss an area of great importance to both countries , and to identify potential collaborative research where the two sides can complement each other 's capabilities .
Dr. Khokhar is an experienced researcher with a strong record of NSF-funded projects .
He is also familiar with the science scene in Pakistan .
Dr. Zaidi is also an experienced scientist who leads a major specialized institute for IT in Pakistan and who will have the backing of that country 's Ministry of Science and Technology .
Among the US participants are five junior scientists .
The project will increase collaboration in science and technology with Pakistan in an area of great importance to both countries .
This project is being supported by the Office of International Science and Engineering and the Division of Computer and Communications Research .
Abstract This project deals with the study of multi-object auctions with multi-dimensional signals .
The recent spurt in interest in the study of multiple-object auctions is largely the result of large-scale privatization of socially held assets by governments .
In light of the emerging view that many results from the mechanism design and information economics literature fail to extend to multiple-object multi-dimensional settings , and in consideration of the influence economic theory has had on the recent design of a number of these privatization auctions , it is of some importance to understand which of the results from the one-good one-dimensional signal auction literature , on which economists base most of their intuition , are sensitive to dimensionality .
This is especially germane since the multi-object , multi-dimensional case is by far the more common .
Milgrom and Weber ( 1982 ) provide a number of important results on the revenue-ranking of various auction forms under incomplete information .
However , their analysis is limited to the case in which the seller has but a single unit of an indivisible good , and the signals received by the bidders are one-dimensional .
As a first step beyond the Milgrom-Weber framework , and in order to get a feel for the underlying economics , we derive the equilibrium of a Vickrey auction in the simplest possible extension of the single-unit environment .
That is , we consider a homogeneous-good , two-unit setup wherein there are but two agents .
The agents receive affiliated signals regarding the value of the good and there is a common-value component to the agents ' valuations .
Remarkably , in this very simple 2x2 environment , we are able to demonstrate the failure of the linkage principle .
The significance of this finding is highlighted by the recent design of the spectral auction .
It is widely agreed by the experts involved in the process that the choice to include an open-auction format in the FCC auction was largely influenced by the faith placed ( now perhaps misplaced ) in the linkage principle .
We continue this line of research by conducting a careful study of the equilibria and their properties in multi-object/multi-dimensional auction environments .
There are numerous questions we focus on .
Does the linkage principle hold for multi-unit first-price auctions ?
Is the multi-unit ascending auction efficient ?
What are its equilibrium strategies ?
How do its revenues compare to those in the multi-unit Vickrey auction ?
What are the equilibrium strategies there ?
This award provides funding for an REU site at the University of Hawaii ( UH ) Sea Grant College .
This REU site is supported by the Department of Defense in partnership with the National Science Foundation 's REU program .
The funding supports a stipend , housing , travel , partial board and laboratory expenses for eight to ten students per year for three years , beginning in the summer of 2003 , during an intensive 10-week summer research program .
The students will work one-one-one with UH Manoa faculty mentors to develop and implement individual research projects , collect and analyze data , interpret results , and present their findings in oral seminars and written reports .
They will be expected to write bi-weekly reports , submit a final report and give at least two oral presentations during the session .
Students will be recruited from across the nation .
0243608 KujawskiThis award funds a three-year Research Experience for Undergraduates ( REU ) Site at Western Michigan University to provide a summer research experience in computer-aided testing and simulation of mechanical components and systems for ten undergraduate students each year .
This program will take a multidisciplinary approach utilizing experimental and numerical techniques to provide a research experience that encourages students to consider graduate studies and pursue careers in engineering research .
Students will be recruited from colleges in the Great Lakes region and also nationwide , with a special focus on students that do not have access to research opportunities at their home institution and students from underrepresented groups .
Activities will include a short course on computer-aided testing and simulation ; an ethics workshop ; an evaluation program ; and other related professional and social activities that will allow a fuller appreciation of research opportunities and careers in academia .
This REU Site is supported by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU Program .
This ten-week REU Site will provide an opportunity for 12 students each summer to conduct research of global significance using the Maumee watershed as a test case .
This REU will educate students regarding the interconnected nature of hydrological processes , water quality , demographics and economics , land use practices , riparian ecosystem quality , sediment contamination , and the legal and policy implications of river ecosystem degradation .
Students will work with a mentor as they conduct research projects focused on the Maumee River and Lake Erie health from environmental , biological , social , and policy perspectives .
The research projects will focus on the Maumee watershed and Lake Erie .
Among the Great Lakes , Lake Erie is unique in that its water quality problems are primarily related to the specific human phenomena of agricultural pollution and urbanization .
The interdisciplinary approach of this REU Site allows for a thorough examination of the environmental and social issues surrounding the environmental degradation of the Maumee watershed ; possible remediation and related policy and legal issues will also be explored .
Students will gain a broad understanding of environmental issues and also learn techniques for field observations through collection of environmental samples ( soil , water , and biological ) , ground truth observations for remote sensing projects , and the use of Geographic Information System ( GIS ) for some projects.This award contributes to the Foundation 's continuing efforts to attract talented students into careers in science through active undergraduate research experiences .
This research explores the feasibility of using wavelet analysis to assess spatial variability in the distribution of arctic pack ice .
Wavelets have been used in recent years to analyze a variety of geophysical processes , but they have not yet been used to study pack ice .
They provide an exact decomposition of the sample variance , for a spatial series , in terms of coefficients that are indexed according to both location and scale .
This information can be used in turn to statistically assess spatial variability in the variance .
Because they provide this information , they are a potentially useful tool for use in characterizing and studying multi-scale , nonstationary features such as pack ice .
This work seeks to demonstrate , through application of wavelet analysis to a large existing database derived from submarine-based observations , that wavelets can be a powerful tool for determining which spatial scales make the greatest contributions to overall variance in arctic pack ice thickness .
Knowledge of these statistical properties is essential for assessing whether observed variations reflect climate change or are due merely to sampling uncertainty .
The anticipated successful completion of this demonstration will provide the impetus for a broader research effort that will address pack ice response to climate variability .
This work will also help to publicize the potential uses of wavelets in studying other geophysical processes and will , in so doing , facilitate their integration into university courses on data analysis .
0243808VoThis proposal will enable a seven-member U.S. bioengineering team to visit Vietnam to conduct a needs assessment .
The team will be coordinated by Dr. Van Toi Vo , Tufts University , and will visit three universities in Vietnam the University of Technology in Hanoi and in Ho Chi Minh City and Can Tho University in Hanoi .
The goal of the delegation is to assess general and specific needs in the field of bioengineering in Vietnam and to conduct site visits to key departments and laboratories .
The information gathered by this team will provide knowledge of the state of development of bioengineering in Vietnam .
The needs assessment team will identify and describe priority steps leading to the development of appropriate bioengineering research in Vietnam and cooperation between the U.S. and Vietnamese scientific communities .
Not Available 0243796 Scott Manalis Massachusetts Institute of Technology Electric Detection of Protein Binding via Aptamer Functionalized Field-Effect DetectorsRecently , highly scalable electronic detection systems for DNA have been developed based on the molecule 's intrinsic charge .
Micrometer-scale field effect sensors , constructed using standard silicon microtechnology , were used to detect nanomolar DNA concentrations within minutes and to distinguish between oligonucleotides differing by a single base .
Potential of tailor-made DNA and RNA aptamers for specifically capturing target proteins on the surface of a silicon field-effect sensor is being investigated under this project .
In collaboration with University of Texas at Austin , aptamers are designed to translate the aptamer-target complex into a modulation of surface charge at the sensor surface .
In addition , in collaboration with Molecular Sciences Institute , recognition molecules are being coupled to the sensor surface to electronically detect simulated biological agents .
The tasks accomplished by this project are divided into two phases corresponding to the two tasks of gene prediction and functional annotation .
In the first phase , a gene-finding system is developed and applied .
This system is designed to be scalable and extensible with respect to the gene features it models , the machine learning algorithms it employs , and the range of experimental data from which it learns .
This project first validates the system by applying it to the complete C.elegans genome , and then retrains the system for the more difficult task of recognizing genes in human DNA .
The second phase of this project consists of two parts .
First , the software framework used for the gene finding system from phase one is generalized to model families of related proteins .
Second , in order to learn from non-sequential data , the project develops functional classification techniques using a discriminative learning method called support vector machines ( SVM 's ) .
The statistics calculated by the sequence-based modeling system functions as one set of features used by the SVM system .
Additional features will come from DNA microarray experiments , the upstream promoter region of each gene , phylogenetic profiles and similarity scores to known protein families .
ABSTRACTFRG Multi-Dimensional Problems for the Euler Equations of Compressible Fluid Flow and Related Problems in Hyperbolic Conservation LawsHistorically , fluid and solid mechanics study the motion ofincompressible and compressible materials , with or without internaldissipation .
For gases and solids with internal dissipation as asecondary effect , the gross wave dynamics is governed by inviscid , thermal diffusionless , dynamics .
Within these categories , compressiblemotion for solids corresponds to the study of elastic waves and theirpropagation ; compressible motion for fluids is usually associated withinviscid gas dynamics .
Furthermore both compressible solids and fluids exhibit shock waves and hence we must search for discontinous solutions to the underlying equations of motion.Incompressible motion on the other hand concernsitself with the motion of denser fluids where the idealization ofincompressibility is useful , e.g .
water or oil , as well as the motion ofcertain solids like rubber .
While there are still many importantmathematical issues to be resolved for incompressible fluids , for example , the well-posedness of the Navier-Stokes equations in three spacedimensions , the mathematical study of compressiblesolids ( as represented by the equations of nonlinear elastodynamics ) andfluids ( as represented by the Euler equations of inviscid flows ) in two and three space dimensions is even less developed.This provides the motivation to the proposers to collaborate in athree year effort to advance the mathematical understanding of themulti-dimensional equations of inviscid compressible fluid dynamicsand related problems in elastodynamics.The core of our plan is to arrange a sustained interaction between andaround the members of the group , who will ( 1 ) collaborate scientifically , focusing on the advancement of theanalysis of multi-dimensional compressible flows by developing newtheoretical techniques and by using and designing effective , robust andreliable numerical methods ; ( 2 ) work together over the next several years to create the environmentand manpower necessary for the research on multi-dimensional compressibleEuler equations and related problems to flourish ; and in the meantime , ( 3 ) share the responsibility of training graduate students andpostdoctoral fellows.The project is devoted to a mathematical study of the Euler equationsgoverning the motion of an inviscid compressible fluid and relatedproblems .
Compressible fluids occur all around us in nature , e.g .
gasesand plasmas , whose study is crucial to understanding aerodyanmics , atmospheric sciences , thermodynamics , etc.While the one-dimensional fluid flows are rather well understood , thegeneral theory for multi-dimensional flows is comparatively mathematicallyunderdeveloped .
The proposers will collaborate in a threeyear effort to advance the mathematical understanding of themulti-dimensional equations of inviscid compressible fluid dynamics.Success in this project will advance knowledge of this fundamental area ofmathematics and mechanics and will introduce a new generation ofresearchers to the outstanding problems in the field .
In this project , funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division , Ault will investigate the oxidation/reduction reactions in transition metal compounds .
Specifically , these include metal oxo compounds , using chromyl chloride , CrCl2O2 , vanadium oxytrichloride , OVCl3 , and methyltrioxorhenium , CH3ReO3 , as prototype systems .
Another class of systems to be studied is the organic peroxides of which hydrogen peroxide is the prototype .
The goals of this work are 1 ) Identification of the key intermediates in the reaction pathway ; 2 ) Sspectroscopic and structural characterizations of the intermediates ; 3 ) Ccomparison of the experimental results with those obtained from high level ab initio calculations ; and 4 ) Mechanistic studies of these reactions.While of intrinsic interest to chemistry , the results of this work will have wide applications ranging from organic synthesis to CVD thin film formation .
The PI has an excellent record of involving graduate and undergraduate students in his research .
They receive valuable training in preparation for advanced studies and entry into the scientific/technological workforce .
AbstractProposal CHE-0243829 Date 1-03-2003PI Sulikowski Institution Texas A & M UniversityThe Chemistry Division award supports a Research Experiences for Undergraduates ( REU ) site at Texas A & M University for the summers of 2003-2006 .
Gary A. Sulikowski is the site 's program director .
Twelve faculty members from the chemistry department will serve as REU mentors to ten students , who will each participate in a ten-week program .
Students from non-Ph .
D. institutions will be targeted for participation in the program .
Research projects will feature biological chemistry , environmental chemistry and materials chemistry .
The program will have weekly meetings and a career development day to provide information on career opportunities in modern chemical sciences .
The Program for Environmental Science at Arkansas State University ( ASU ) provides a 10-week summer research experience for 10 highly motivated traditionally under-represented minority undergraduate students interested in environmental research .
The summer research program focuses on interdisciplinary investigation of aquatic agri-ecosystems in the Delta , Ozark , and Ouachita regions of Arkansas .
The land-use in these regions strongly influences ecosystem processes such as runoff , nutrient cycling , and aquatic and terrestrial habitats .
In addition , the dominance of agriculture significantly impacts land- and water-use policy , law and economics .
Understanding the chemistry , ecology , geology , policy and economics of agri-ecosystems provides a unique opportunity for undergraduate students to investigate relations between natural and anthropogenic disturbances on ecosystem processes .
The principal objectives are to promote the professional development of undergraduate researchers and instill a better appreciation for interdisciplinary approaches to problem solving .
The REU scholars , individually and in small groups , work closely with faculty mentors on research projects ranging from ecotoxicology , geochemistry , biogeochemistry , vertebrate and invertebrate ecology , to resource management , policy , law and economics .
The program challenges scholars to expand their disciplinary focus and develop an interdisciplinary perspective .
Weekly project meetings are used to evaluate progress , examine interdisciplinary linkages between individual research components , and develop new and expanded research plans .
Students also participate in ethics seminars where they have an opportunity to debate ethical , gender and minority , and environmental policy issues with the program staff and invited professionals .
9902957AlbertsonThis study investigates the exchange of water vapor , energy , and momentum between forested watersheds and the atmospheric boundary layer ( ABL ) , using a combination of emerging tools in numerical simulation of turbulent flow and transport through and above plant canopies and recent result from a comprehensive field campaign .
The field experiment , conducted in October of 1997 , included seven research groups measuring land surface fluxes of water vapor , heat , carbon dioxide , and momentum on seven towers situated within a pine forest at Duke Forest near Durham , North Carolina .
The data set studied here is the first comprehensive experiment that includes simultaneous velocity statistics and flux measurements at as many as seven locations in the canopy sublayer of a forest along with detailed leaf area density profile measurements in space .
To explore and generalize the relationship between forest structure and observed heat and water vapor fluxes , an investigation using three-dimensional Large Eddy Simulations ( LES ) is proposed .
These simulations are the first to explicitly consider variability in leaf area density in space and employ radiative transfer schemes to realistically account for energy attenuation by foliage elements .
The simulations , which treat the foliage as a multiply-connected porous medium , will permit investigating how the spatial structure of forest canopies interact with energy/radiation and the turbulent transport dynamics to give rise to the observed spatial patterns in land surface flux fields within and above the canopy .
An anticipated result is an understanding of what spatial variability in fluxes could be attributed to spatial variability in canopy structure for flux measurements within the canopy sublayer .
The results from this study will guide future field experiments that seek to estimate forest-wide average fluxes from tower measurement and will rigorously assess the range of applicability of one-dimensional canopy models .
ABSTRACTFRG Multi-Dimensional Problems for the Euler Equations of Compressible Fluid Flow and Related Problems in Hyperbolic Conservation LawsHistorically , fluid and solid mechanics study the motion ofincompressible and compressible materials , with or without internaldissipation .
For gases and solids with internal dissipation as asecondary effect , the gross wave dynamics is governed by inviscid , thermal diffusionless , dynamics .
Within these categories , compressiblemotion for solids corresponds to the study of elastic waves and theirpropagation ; compressible motion for fluids is usually associated withinviscid gas dynamics .
Furthermore both compressible solids and fluids exhibit shock waves and hence we must search for discontinous solutions to the underlying equations of motion.Incompressible motion on the other hand concernsitself with the motion of denser fluids where the idealization ofincompressibility is useful , e.g .
water or oil , as well as the motion ofcertain solids like rubber .
While there are still many importantmathematical issues to be resolved for incompressible fluids , for example , the well-posedness of the Navier-Stokes equations in three spacedimensions , the mathematical study of compressiblesolids ( as represented by the equations of nonlinear elastodynamics ) andfluids ( as represented by the Euler equations of inviscid flows ) in two and three space dimensions is even less developed.This provides the motivation to the proposers to collaborate in athree year effort to advance the mathematical understanding of themulti-dimensional equations of inviscid compressible fluid dynamicsand related problems in elastodynamics.The core of our plan is to arrange a sustained interaction between andaround the members of the group , who will ( 1 ) collaborate scientifically , focusing on the advancement of theanalysis of multi-dimensional compressible flows by developing newtheoretical techniques and by using and designing effective , robust andreliable numerical methods ; ( 2 ) work together over the next several years to create the environmentand manpower necessary for the research on multi-dimensional compressibleEuler equations and related problems to flourish ; and in the meantime , ( 3 ) share the responsibility of training graduate students andpostdoctoral fellows.The project is devoted to a mathematical study of the Euler equationsgoverning the motion of an inviscid compressible fluid and relatedproblems .
Compressible fluids occur all around us in nature , e.g .
gasesand plasmas , whose study is crucial to understanding aerodyanmics , atmospheric sciences , thermodynamics , etc.While the one-dimensional fluid flows are rather well understood , thegeneral theory for multi-dimensional flows is comparatively mathematicallyunderdeveloped .
The proposers will collaborate in a threeyear effort to advance the mathematical understanding of themulti-dimensional equations of inviscid compressible fluid dynamics.Success in this project will advance knowledge of this fundamental area ofmathematics and mechanics and will introduce a new generation ofresearchers to the outstanding problems in the field .
This is a Research Experience for Undergraduates ( REU ) site for field , analytical experimental , and theoretical study of geological fluids .
Research in this program range from surface and near-surface fluid systems to the mantle to the core .
Fourteen undergraduate students will be recruited nationally each year.The students will investigate topics with the common theme of fluids in the Earth .
They will be involved in various research activities , including the impacts of human activities on groundwater quality primarily in karst and fractured rock aquifers , limnogeolgogy research on lakes to understand regional environmental dynamics , evaulation of the chemical and mechanical effects of fluids in metamorphic and igneous systems , the effect of melt on rheology of mantle rocks , and numerical hands-on experience with mantle convection and core dynamics using scientific visualization.The program features many attributes that foster a cohort experience .
In particular , interns participate in two symposia in which they explain their projects and results to each other and to members of the department .
In addition , they are exposed to disciplines outside their summer research by participating in field trips to Midwestern sites ( caves , glacial lake/river features , mid-continent rift lavas ) , by touring a wide range of laboratory facilities ( rock magnetism , isotope geochemistry , rock mechanics , electron microscopy ) at the University of Minnesota and vicinity .
An important goal of the internship program is to foster a sense of community among the summer students as they interact with future Earth science colleagues and friends , and so the program includes weekend activities such as picnics , boating on Lake Superior , bike rides around the lakes in the Twin Cities , and visits to museums .
Program activities emphasize the connections and commonality of research carried out in diverse research fields , in order to help develop communication between the students and an appreciation for the broad range of problems that can be addressed with the same experimental , analytical and computational tools .
AbstractProposal Title Algorithms for Improved Engineering of ChemistryProposal Number CTS-0114263Principal Investigator Michael DeemInstitution University of California Los AngelesThe objective of this project is the development of strategies for searching for the best materials property using combinatorial techniques coupled with Monte Carlo methods .
The techniques to be developed are aimed at improving on the current grid search methods , which are often cumbersome to employ .
Monte Carlo strategies are expected to provide significant improvement , and the ability to incorporate a priori knowledge should further improve the search strategy .
Several variables can be manipulated in order to seek the material with the optimal figure of merit .
Variables such as composition as well as film thickness and deposition method can be investigated .
The work will focus on the theoretical aspects of the problem .
Virtual libraries and materials will be constructed , and the Random Phase Volume model will be used to assess the validity of the methods .
Techniques developed will be applied to data generated by an industrial collaborator .
A wide range of improved material properties such as superconductivity , magnetoresistance or catalytic activity have been sought using combinatorial methods .
The overall goal of high-throughput methods is to hasten discovery for improved processes and materials properties .
This award provides funding for a summer internship program at University of Rhode Island 's Graduate School of Oceanography ( GSO ) located in Narragansett , RI .
This program has been active since 1986 and is called the Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowships in Oceanography ( SURFO ) .
Nine students/summer will participate in an eleven week research/education program that allows them to conduct independent research projects .
The program aims to expose students who are majoring in math , physics , computer science and engineering to aspects of oceanographic research , and normally recruits rising Juniors with strong computational skills .
Students receive one-on-one research instruction from a faculty mentor .
They participate in a variety of educational activities , including an orientation session , a seminar series , field trips and several professional development workshops .
At the end of the summer , students prepare both an oral and a written presentation on their research .
The University of South Florida establishes an interdisciplinary Research Experiences for Undergraduates ( REU ) Site focusing on the modeling , synthesis and characterization of nanomaterials .
Twelve students are recruited every year for ten-week summer research experience .
Eight professors from the Departments of Chemistry , Chemical Engineering , Electrical Engineering and Mechanical Engineering serve as research advisors .
Students participate in research projects with a focus on molecular science and its applications in nanotechnology , including theoretical modeling , synthesis , characterization and applications of nanomaterials .
Students also attend workshops on instrumentation , patenting and licensing , ethics in research , tours of local high tech companies , and group social activities .
This work focuses on quantitative studies of fluctuations caused by thermal noise below and near bifurcations in systems far from equilibrium .
Well below the bifurcation it is expected that the measurements will test recent predictions about the structure factor of a fluid in a thermal gradient .
Near the bifurcation the nonlinear interactions between the fluctuations should lead to critical phenomena in the sense that the various measurable quantities will deviate non-trivially from mean-field ( or linear ) predictions .
The experiments will focus on Rayleigh-Bernard convection ( RBC ) in a horizontal layer of a fluid heated from below , and on electro convection ( EC ) of a nematic liquid crystal in an electric field .
It has been predicted that RBC belongs to a universality class first studied theoretically by Brazovskii for which fluctuations change the bifurcation from a second-order to a first-order transition .
For electro convection there is at present no theory of the critical behavior , but on general grounds one expects several different universality classes that depend on the relationship between the nematic director and the convection-roll wave director .
The experiments will open a new research field of critical phenomena in non-equilibrium systems , and will prepare graduate students and postgraduate researchers for academic or industrial careers .
Within an outreach program they will offer opportunities for participation by high school students.Many properties of equilibrium systems exhibit large thermally driven fluctuations near critical points .
An example is the density of a fluid near a liquid-gas critical point .
Nonlinear interactions between the fluctuations then cause the critical behavior to be different from that which is expected when fluctuations are small .
The same phenomena should occur in a very different context , namely near transitions in non-equilibrium systems .
For example , the transition from pure conduction to convection in a thin horizontal layer of a fluid heated from below was predicted to be of second order when fluctuations were neglected , but to become a first-order transition when they were considered .
This work will determine the critical behavior near transitions in several non-equilibrium systems , including convection in a fluid heated from below and convection in a liquid crystal exposed to an electric voltage .
This research will use advanced experimental techniques and sophisticated numerical image analysis , which will provide excellent training of graduate students for careers in academic and industrial positions .
It also lends itself well to the participation of undergraduate students .
Within an outreach program it is expected that high school students will also participate in some of the experiments .
The University of Houston establishes a Research Experiences for Undergraduates ( REU ) Site affiliated with its Center for Materials Chemistry .
Ten students are recruited nationwide every year for a nine-week summer research experience .
Students participate in research projects in the general areas of synthesis , characterization , and physical studies of materials , including the synthesis of organic , inorganic and composite materials , instrument-intensive physical studies of materials , and theoretical modeling of materials .
REU participants also take a three-credit Independent Studies course in materials chemistry , attend scientific seminars and participate in organized social activities .
PI Bush Institution Marshall UniversityThe Chemistry Division award supports a Research Experiences for Undergraduates ( REU ) site at Marshall University for the summers of 2003-2005 .
Seth Bush is the site 's program director .
Eleven faculty from the chemistry departments at Marshall University and West Virginia State College will serve as student mentors to 8 students each summer for ten weeks .
Students will be recruited from the Appalachian geographic area and from a larger national pool in roughly equal numbers .
Research projects are offered in the area of chemistry having a biochemical orientation .
Participants will develop a broad range of practical scientific laboratory skills such as synthesis , instrumental analysis and computation .
Students will prepare a proposal , an oral progress report and a final poster session .
The research experience will be evaluated by exit interviews and long term tracking of participants .
The Psychology Research Experience Program ( PREP ) provides a systematic and thorough exposure to research in psychology with a focus on professional development as a researcher in psychology .
PREP students become members of the mentor 's laboratory , taking part in all aspects of research from reading the appropriate literature and discussing research ideas with the mentor , to gathering and analyzing data , to organizing and interpreting the results .
PREP students interact closely with other undergraduate and graduate students in the mentor 's lab .
The end of the PREP program is marked by a symposium in the last week where each PREP student makes a 15-minute oral presentation of the work they did during the summer .
Additionally , weekly group meetings are held with all PREP students .
At these meetings , each mentor presents his or her research to the PREP students .
In this way , each PREP student is exposed to a broad range of psychological research .
Also , films are shown each week to spark student discussion of ethical issues in science .
PREP students are housed with other young scientists in similar programs in other scientific disciplines .
This award contributes to the Foundation 's continuing efforts to attract talented students into careers in science through active undergraduate research experiences .
ABSTRACTOCE-0243071Fifteen scientist who participated in the initial international intercalibration exercise carried out under the auspices of the SCOR Working Group 109 will be invited to participate in a workshop to be held on December 5 , 2002 in San Francisco .
The objective of the workshop is to analyze and interpret dissolved Fe measurements obtained by about 20 laboratories for a water samples collected in the South Atlantic .
Initial evaluation of the data obtained for this sample by the different laboratories shows values ranging from 0.3 nM to 2.0 nM .
Given the importance of this element as a micronutrient which can limit primary production , it is imperative that the reasons for the variability in the results be identified .
Amongst the possible problems that could be contributing to the variability in the values obtained thus far are the following ( 1 ) contamination in the laboratory where the initial sample was separated into separate aliquots ; ( 2 ) contamination in the participants laboratory ; and ( 3 ) different recoveries by the various methods used to obtain the Fe values .
It is expected that during this workshop the factors responsible for the observed variability in Fe concentrations for a single sample will be identified , as well as that guidelines for the next intercomparison exercise be established .
Geoffrey Coates , Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology , Cornell University , is supported by the Inorganic , Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program for his continued work on biodegradable and low environmental impact polymers .
Coates will use metal-based catalysts to prepare polymers and copolymers with precise architectural control , imparting superior properties and allowing important applications .
More specifically , beta-diiminate zinc complexes will be developed as catalysts for epoxide/carbon dioxide copolymerization and lactone polymerization .
Chiral catalysts based on hybrid imine/oxazoline ligands will be developed , potentially leading to optically active , tactic polycarbonates .
The detailed mechanistic pathways of these reactions will also be studied , which should increase the rate of discovery of improved catalysts for these polymerizations.The environmental impact of industrially important plastics can be minimized by using renewable feedstocks and preparing biodegradable polymers .
New catalysts and new reactions will be used to contribute to sustainable development .
Students will be trained in catalyst synthesis , polymer synthesis and polymer characterization .
Public understanding of science and particularly plastics will be enhanced through chemical demonstrations and mass media .
The Stony Brook Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Physics and Astronomy brings 13 undergraduate students to the Stony Brook campus each summer for participation in an eight-week program of forefront research in the laboratories of Stony Brook physics and astronomy faculty members .
The immediate aim of the program is to provide training in , encourage interest in , and appreciation of , scientific research in physics and to facilitate career planning by the actual doing of research in a collegial setting , by site visits to research laboratories at Stony Brook and Brookhaven National Laboratory , by weekly seminars on current problems in physics and finally by presentations of student research results in a formal symposium and a written report at the conclusion of the program .
Outstanding projects are submitted for presentation at national student research symposia.The program offers research opportunities in the areas of astronomy , atmospheric physics , high-energy particle physics , instructional laboratory instrumentation , lasers and optics , nuclear physics and solid-state/condensed matter physics .
Most projects are experimental but a few are theoretical .
Recruiting efforts concentrate on sophomore and junior level physics majors of high academic standing , many from colleges in which research opportunities are limited .
The broader aims of the program include increasing the national pool of qualified scientific researchers , and fostering understanding of research methods to those who go on to other fields of endeavor such as , for example , science/ engineering administration , patent law , or secondary school teaching .
Particular efforts are made to attract women and students from under-represented minorities .
UT-Austin establishes a Research Experiences for Undergraduates ( REU ) Site affiliated with its Physics Department .
Thirteen students are recruited every year for a ten-week summer research experience .
The research activity of the REU Site focuses on experimental condensed matter physics and on atomic , molecular and optical physics .
The condensed matter program includes experimental research on thin films , microstructures and nanotechnology , with emphasis on materials that exhibit strong electron correlation and mesoscopic behavior .
The atomic , molecular and optical physics program encompasses a range of research topics centered around the use of optical and/or electron based techniques to study and control matter .
In addition to participating in research projects , students attend research seminars and group social activities .
0243801 ToutanjiThis award funds a three-year Research Experience for Undergraduates ( REU ) Site at the University of Alabama Huntsville ( UAH ) that will provide students with a research experience in the area of advanced composite materials and systems .
Student participants , ten each year , will be engaged in educational and research activities over a period of ten weeks during the summer .
Each student will be assigned to a clearly defined project that is related to current research efforts at the university .
The students will not only participate in scientific research but will also learn how to integrate their work into larger projects .
Students will be recruited from the following groups UAH programs , minority-serving institutions , and four-year schools that do not have large research programs .
This REU Site is supported by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU Program .
AbstractProposal CHE-0243659 Date 1-15-2003PI Broadbelt Institution U of Texas AustinThis REU site at the University of Texas , Austin will expose students to environmental science .
Twelve faculty from four departments ( chemistry , geological sciences , integrative biology , pharmacy ) will be the research mentors .
All faculty are members of the Environmental Science Institute .
The research projects will develop expertise in a traditional area of science while uniting with other disciplines to attack complex problems .
Eight to nine students will be involved in 10 weeks of research and associated activities .
The recruiting emphasis will focus on students from undergraduate institutions mainly from Texas that have a high proportion of students from historically underrepresented backgrounds , .
A secondary theme of the site is science communication .
Students will interact with a technical writer .
They will prepare articles for a discovery type magazine and a poster for a poster session at the end of the summer .
The students will also engage in three field study scientific excursions to introduce them to non-laboratory based scientific endeavors .
The objective of this project is to develop a new process for Ta chemical vapor deposition ( CVD ) .
The deposition of TaN and Ta-Si-N films have potential applications in microelectronics , but useful methods for forming them have not been reported .
The reactants will be TaF5 and SiH4 .
Calculations suggest that these materials are the simplest commercially available compounds that have favorable thermodynamics for producing Ta metal while avoiding silicide formation .
Films will be deposited over a range of operating conditions and characterization measurements will determine whether Ta metal is being deposited cleanly and uniformly .
Training of graduate students will be the primary educational impact .
The results of this project may have a significant impact on the microelectronics industry .
Tantalum and mixed Ta/TaNx thin films are the leading candidates for diffusion barrier layers , which are essential for advanced interconnect technology based on copper metallization .
The proposed work should also enhance the fundamental understanding of early transition metal chemistry .
The mechanistic implications of the observed kinetics may be useful for subsequently developing an alternating layer deposition technology for the reactants used in this study .
The invention of agriculture is one of humankind 's greatest achievements and archaeology 's greatest challenges .
Despite great strides in archaeological understanding , archaeologists still do not fully grasp why the first experiments with agriculture began so late in time ( 10,000 BP ) and in only a handful of centers ( Near East , Mesoamerica , South America , North China , South Asia , Africa ) .
Of this handful , the North China center is the least known and most likely to shed new light on these questions .
The problem in North China is that the archaeological hunter-gatherers whose knowledge of plants laid the foundation for agriculture are well removed in time and space from the oldest presently known agricultural cultures ( Cishan , Peiligang , and Dadiwan ) , which are too highly developed to represent the first stages of agriculture .
The transitional groups that connect the two , North China 's earliest agriculturalists , are missing .
For the Dadiwan culture ( 7000 BP ) in western North China , the antecedent hunter-gatherer complex is found 250 miles ( 400 km ) due north , in the Helan-Tengger sequence ( 12,700 - 10,000 BP ) documented in surveys and excavations by a team of Chinese ( Chen Fahu ) and US scholars ( R. Bettinger , R. Elston , P. J. Brantingham , and D. B. Madsen ) have been conducting in Nei Mongol Autonomous Region and Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region since 1989 .
The research suggests that early Holocene plant intensification began in the Helan-Tengger study area but that the earliest agricultural experiments were somewhat further south , toward Dadiwan .
These probably began during a warm-wet episode about 9300 BP that encouraged northern hunter-gatherers to intensify plant use and experiment with plant propagation in a limited way to augment more favored food sources , mainly game .
A severe , cold-dry climatic reversal documented around 9000 BP forced this pattern further south , to the Dadiwan area , where agriculture became established on a small scale and then expanded dramatically when climate turned warmer and wetter around 8000 BP .
Plainly , the early agricultural sites that connect the hunter-gatherer Helan-Tengger complex in the North to the developed agricultural Dadiwan complex in the South must lie in the area between .
The proposed survey will use substantial vehicle travel to locate , and foot travel to reach , likely site locations in this intervening area .
Archaeological charcoal suitable for radiocarbon dating will be obtained from sites whose stone tools and ceramics place them within the Helan-Tengger to Dadiwan gap .
Our research team of US and PRC scholars has extensive experience with this sort of survey north of the Yellow River but none in the proposed study area to its south , where site locations should be different and perhaps more difficult to detect .
Success in finding and dating these sites is not assured but would surely be of great significance .
It would articulate the first continuous record of the transition from hunting and gathering to agriculture in China - and in so doing document this first critical step in the development of one of the world 's greatest civilizations .
The overall objective of this project is to determine the relationship between phenotypic variations and the associated whole genome transcriptional pattern in populations of E.coli and S. cerevisiae cells cultivated under well defined , reproducible conditions .
This will be done in three types of experiments distinguished according to the cultivation mode .
The first type of experiments will involve simple batch cultivation of cells .
Samples will be taken from different growth stages of the culture .
The second type of experiments will involve continuous cultivation of cells in a chemostat operated at different steady states .
The third type of experiments will involve exposure of the cells to an environmental challenge .
Such challenges will include the shifting of a steady state chemostat culture to a new dilution rate .
The response to such a nutritional upshift or downshift will be analyzed .
In all types of experiments the phenotypic variability of the culture will be determined by flow cytometry and subpopulations of cells will be isolated via cell sorting .
Sorted cells will be subjected to protocols for microarray analysis to determine the whole genome transcriptional profile .
To make this possible an amplification protocol will be developed to reproducibly generate a sufficient amount of RNA from only a few cells to permit quantitative microarray analysis .
Title Strengthening Science , Technology , Engineering , and Mathematics Programs of StudyTurtle Mountain Community CollegeHRD 0222546PI - Carol DavisWith NSF support , Turtle Mountain Community College ( TMCC ) will improve its capacity to enroll , retain , and graduate Native American students in STEM disciplines .
The use of technology will be emphasized where it can be directly applied within the STEM curriculum and used as a mechanism to enhance teaching and learning .
Faculty professional development will also focus on the infusion of technology into the STEM curriculum.Project goals include strengthening the institution 's technological infrastructure and systematically enhancing TMCC 's STEM capacity ; improving STEM teaching and learning through curriculum development , reform and enhancement ; and , broadening student participation in STEM programs through improved outreach , recruitment , retention and graduation .
Special emphasis will focus on promoting student success in STEM gatekeeper and bottleneck courses .
INT-0222570North Carolina State University $ 8,400The project is about a planning visit for developing collaborative research work in cellulosic fine materials with researchers at Chungnam National University in Korea .
Scientific study of cellulosic fine materials would help drainage improvement and efficient utilization in papermaking .
The proposed project is to initiate a fundamental heat transfer study of the head and neck system to predict the brain temperature .
The research will involve the collaborative efforts of an engineering research at Rice University and a medical researcher at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center .
There is considerable data at present to justify the need to know the brain temperature in infants who have suffered hypoxia-ischemia , or are at great risk for hypoxia-ischemia .
Similar considerations extend to other patient age groups including children and adults with head trauma , surgical correction of congenital heart disease , and adults with stroke .
A thermal model for head and neck will be initiated by incorporating the relation between metabolic heat generation and temperature , the effect of physiological parameters and regulatory mechanisms on the cerebral blood flow and the countercurrent heat transfer in the neck 's vessels .
As a component of Dr. A. Laptook 's ongoing investigations on newborn miniature swine brain at UTSMC , additional measurements will be made available to Dr. Y. Bayazitoglu at Rice to include them in her head and neck thermal modeling , to determine how brain temperature is affected by acute alterations in arterial oxygen tension , arterial carbon dioxide tension , brain metabolic rate , and brain ischemia.The initiated research will provide foundation of important future contributions in understanding the pathogenesis of brain injury , and in monitoring of brain temperature during therapeutic interventions .
In addition , the created mathematical models will eventually be used as teaching tools to search for optimal treatment by incorporating temperature as another variable .
This project will be a five-week summer school on the topic of spatio-temporal statistical analysis and its application to multi-platform , multi-sensor bio-optical oceanic data .
The summer school seeks to address some of the analysis challenges anticipated as the Integrated Ocean Observing System is established .
These are associated with the very diverse range of spatial and temporal sampling afforded by the different components of such a system and contemporaneous process experiments .
Statistical experts in spatial information engineering with experience in collaboration with ocean scientists will discuss some of the modern tools for statistical analysis of such data and associated challenges , while ocean scientists will introduce students to the data and the underlying science questions .
The primary focus will be on analysis of the distribution of phytoplankton , which is known to be a patchy and intermittent field , the interpretation of measurements of which are complicated by advection .
This should serve as a model for the study of statistical techniques that can then be applied to other environmental fields .
An interdisciplinary group of approximately 16 students will be recruited , half with background in mathematical sciences and half with ocean science backgrounds .
The goal is to introduce students to interdisciplinary research questions and provide stimulating ideas that they can subsequently apply in their dissertation research .
This project will maintain and enhance the GLOBE teacher 's guide in print , on the Web and on CD-ROM .
The teacher 's guide is a nearly 1,000 page document containing detailed instructions for setting up study sites , collecting data , and implementing math and science learning in the classroom .
In addition , two teacher 's enhancement guides will be developed for elementary and middle school teachers who participate in the GLOBE program .
One guide will help teachers accomplish the Inquiry and Personal and Social components of the National Science Education Standards , and the other will help teachers develop their student 's literacy and language arts through participation in GLOBE .
The goal of this collaborative proposal between the University of California at Santa Cruz and Duke University is the definition of features for recognition and classification of objects in imagery .
Feature vectors are enriched and made invariant at the same time by an efficient , probabilistic coding of the feature-space manifolds that are obtained when features undergo all possible transformations in a predefined class .
This coding is designed to circumvent the curse of dimensionality by reducing the representation requirements to the two properties that are essential for recognition and classification , that is , uniqueness and continuity .
Uniqueness requires different manifolds to be coded differently , while continuity requires similar codings for similar manifolds.Theoretical and empirical investigations will study optimal feature design , the performance of these features with various classification and recognition methods , and the trade-off of computational efficiency and performance .
Misclassification rates for families of features and transformations will also be measured , both by theoretical bounds and empirical tests .
The behavior of the proposed representations will be examined in the presence of clutter and data corruptions such as occlusions .
These concepts will be tested through their application to the automatic diagnosis of colon cancer from computerized tomography scans , and to the interpretation of American sign language from video sequences .
Childhood vaccination has become the single greatest defense against infectious diseases among children in the United States .
Moreover , biotechnology breakthroughs are making it possible for vaccine manufacturers to develop vaccine antigens for numerous diseases .
One unplanned consequence of such innovations is that the Recommended Childhood Immunization Schedule ( as set forth by the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices ) has become sufficiently crowded that the prospect of adding additional vaccines ( hence additional injections ) to this schedule may not be well received by either health-care providers or parents/guardians .
This has prompted vaccine manufacturers to develop vaccines products that combine several antigens into a single injection .
Such vaccines , termed combination vaccines , permit new vaccines to be added to the schedule without placing additional burdens on parents/guardians , nor requiring children to endure an unacceptable number of injections during single clinic visits .
Such innovations have also created a combinatorial explosion of choices for health-care providers that will continue to escalate and expand as additional vaccines are added to the immunization schedule and as new combination vaccines gain approved for distribution .
The goals of this project are to design operations research models that capture all the vaccines that are presently in the recommended childhood immunization schedule , as well as vaccines that may enter the schedule over the next decade , to formulate and analyze optimization models that can be used to determine the maximal price at which new combination vaccine products provide good value to the health-care consumer , and to perform sensitivity analysis to determine the impact of new vaccines on the optimal vaccine formularies and vaccine prices.The results of this research provide a systematic approach to compare and evaluate existing and new pediatric vaccines within the recommended childhood immunization schedule .
This , in turn , will provide a vehicle upon which opportunities for new vaccines and vaccine combinations can be evaluated using operations research models , hence has the potential to enhance immunization rates given the set of vaccine choices available .
Moreover , the tools developed will provide a mechanism by which health-care providers and consumers can assess the economic value of such vaccines , hence facilitating the application of market principles within the pediatric vaccine industry .
This in turn may also serve to put downward pressure on the prices of such vaccines , an issue of significant national concern .
This research will be conducted in collaboration with personnel within the National Immunization Program at the Center for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) .
The long range goal of this project is to develop an understanding of the connections between the structure of complex enzyme-promoted metabolic networks and their structural capacity to admit more than one steady state .
More generally , the Principal Investigator ( PI ) is interested in connecting his long experience with intricate reaction networks to important problems in both cell biology and biotechnology .
Electrochemical ceramics encompass a variety of present and emerging technologies , including gas sensors , fuel cells , gas-separation membranes , and membrane reactors .
Of critical importance to modeling the properties of electrochemical ceramics , and developing new materials with improved performance , is a strong understanding of electronic structure .
Since most electrochemical ceramics possess complex intermediate-length scale order , their properties often defy explanation when viewed from traditional paradigms invoking localized or collective viewpoints of electronic structure .
In order to gain a more complete understanding of electronic structure in electrochemical ceramics , we propose to measure the populations of localized and delocalized electrons in transition metal perovskites having general composition LaSrCoFe oxides ( LSCF ) using a novel high-sensitivity Faraday balance .
These measurements will be used to interpret parallel studies of electrochemical properties , including electron transport , ionic defect structure , chemical expansion and stress , and catalytic activity .
In addition , the PI is currently developing a new program of undergraduate laboratory experiments that integrate research and teaching .
This program provides undergraduates with formal opportunities to contribute to Ph.D.-level research in modern growth areas of chemical engineering , producing real data that will be published ( not just put into a lab report ) .
In this way research and undergraduate education are on the same track , with a complementary agenda .
The proposed project will contribute one experiment to this educational program , which is linked ( and feeds directly into ) our research program in electrochemical ceramics .
Students will screen new materials for electronic structure using high-temperature magnetic susceptibility measurements and Taguchi analysis methods. % % % This project will contribute broadly to our understanding of electronic structure in complex materials .
The results are of general interest to all branches of materials science , including solid-state electrochemistry , electronic materials , ceramics , as well as inorganic chemistry and physics .
This project will also provide specific information about electronic structure in one class of materials , of immediate value to workers developing reaction/separation membranes and solid-oxide fuel cells .
The principal investigator has 8 years academic and 4 years industrial experience in this field , bringing a strong mix of fundamental and practical perspectives .
This work is highly original , and contributes several novel advances to proven experimental techniques .
The experimental plan is well organized , and the proposing institution has a world-class infrastructure for work in this cross-disciplinary field .
In addition , the career development plan of the PI will help establish a strong fundamental research and educational program in a new , exciting , area of technology .
This program will not only educate individual scientists in its field , but will also tightly integrate research and teaching in a way that benefits both , and opens new opportunities for undergraduates ( many of whom , at CWRU , are women and minorities ) to participate in cutting-edge research on a broad scale .
This approach provides a new template for teaching that other higher-educational institutions may benefit from .
Knowledge gained from both research and educational development will be disseminated broadly through the literature , and directly through strong ties of the PI to industry and the American Society of Engineering Education .
This is a proposal for funding in support of the annual Clemson mini-Conference on Combinatorial Optimization , now in its 16th consecutive year of existence .
This day-and-a-half long conference is held every year at Clemson University , Clemson , South Carolina , on a Thursday and Friday , usually sometime during the first two weeks of October .
The mini-Conference invites about 12 speakers to give 40-minute talks on their current research .
Speakers are chosen equally between the fields of discrete mathematics ( including combinatorics , graph theory , operations research and coding theory ) , and algorithmic computer science ( including computation theory , computationalcomplexity and the design and analysis of algorithms ) .
This dissertation research project analyses the historical emergence of the notion of the scientific model , and specifically the emergence of the assumption that models are universally valid representations of nature , by investigating the role of anatomical models for the formation of science and the state around 1800 .
Using archival sources and surviving model collections , the project will analyze and compare practices of model production and model use at two state institutions where science was developed in its conceptual and institutional framework explicitly for state use a public naturalhistory museum and model workshop founded during physiocratic reforms in late eighteenth-century Tuscany , and a military training hospital established in enlightened absolutist Austria .
The project will focus on three question areas 1 ) How does the interplay between conceptual developments and social dynamics within the workshop establish the models as universal representations , and how does model use support or challenge these claims to universality ?
2 ) What kind of science was developed conceptually and institutionally through model production and model use at the museum , and at the hospital ?
3 ) What is the envisioned function of this science for the state , and what is the function of the image of the human body conveyed through the models for enlightened absolutism and subsequent regimes ?
Fund are for travel to relevant research sites in Florence and other parts of Italy .
This project is the continuation of the maintenance and development of the RIDGE Petrologic Database ( PetDB ) , which currently contains and serves over the internet the complete published geochemical dataset for sub-oceanic rocks and minerals generated at mid-ocean ridges .
Technical aspects of the database will be transferred to a professional database environment , the database will be updated with all newly published data , development will be continued , and the database will be mined for second-order products that are of use to the broad community .
0222408Yi-SunSea ice is a dominant feature of marine ecosystems in the Arctic .
Its presence impacts Arctic marine ecosystems , especially on the shelves where benthic and pelagic systems are extensively coupled .
If the extent and thickness of sea ice continue to decline , a shift is predicted in the type of algal material reaching the benthos ( from ice algae to phytoplankton ) , which will potentially impact the food requirements of the benthos .
Several pieces of evidence show that both types of ice algae ( below-ice ice algae dominated by Melosira arctica and within-ice ice algae dominated by Nitzchia frigida ) presently reach the benthos in significant quantities .
This research effort will investigate the digestibility of ice algae and phytoplankton-derived organic matter by the Arctic macrobenthos .
From the perspective of a macrofaunal organism , digestibility includes three separate components 1 ) selection ( is encountered organic material ingested or rejected ?
) ; 2 ) absorption ( is ingested organic material absorbed during passage through the gut , or does it get egested in the feces ?
) ; and 3 ) assimilation ( is absorbed organic material assimilated into biomass ? ) .
Assessment of long-term assimilation of the various types of algae ( within-ice ice algae ; below-ice ice algae ; and phytoplankton ) will be conducted by determining lipid biomarkers and their isotopic ratios , and by determining CHN and protein signatures of organisms collected during all aspects of the work in both Norway and Kotzebue , Alaska .
Assessment of short-term absorption will first use the ash-ratio method in a whole-core delivery experiment .
Following the whole-core experiments , dominant taxa from each trophic group will be identified and used in a comparison of absorption efficiencies as calculated by the ash-ratio method , and carbon retention efficiencies as calculated using a pulse-chase radiotracer approach .
Finally , the group plans to repeat the dominant taxa absorption efficiency experiments in both Svalbard , Norway at the Ny Aalesund lab and in Kotzebue Sound , Alaska .
This proposed project compliments , and will derive synergistic benefits from two projects funded by the Norwegian Research Council in Norway .
Funds are provided to process the data collected on two geophysical cruises in the Sea of Marmara .
The PIs will combine the results from the collected chirp , sidescan , and bathymetric data with detailed sedimentology of piston cores and land-based observations to work out the configuration of the fault zone and to determine the history of paleoseismicity by correlating submarine landslides and turbidites to individual paloearthquakes .
The work will have important societal relevance as it will lead to better understanding of the nature of deformation associated with the earthquakes and their history in the region .
C-RUI Forever Wild , the Adirondack Uplands and Watershed IntegrityThe purpose of this study is to determine how underlying physical factors ( such as geology ) andforest land management practices interact to influencewatershed integrity in the AdirondackUplands of nothern New York State .
We will address the central question Does long-term forest preservation enhance watershed structure and function in Adirondack uplands ?
The proposed activity will involve a multidisciplinary approach to study patterns in multiple variables in reference catchments ( subjected to forest removal durning the past 15 years ) in the Adirondack Uplands.Within reference and managed categories catchments will be selected along a gradient of surficial soil conditions from shallow/till soils to deep/outwash soils .
Comparison across watersheds will include hydrogeology , surficial geology , biogeochemistry , forest community , and aquatic community response variables .
Data analysis will include multivariate statistical methods to extract patterns across the landscape in response variables .
ABSTRACTPIs Steven Hofmann , Loukas Grafakos , Alex Iosevich , Igor VerbitskyProposal DMS-0222187Institution University of Missouri at Columbia This proposal requests funding for a conference on HarmonicAnalysis and Partial Differential Equations to be held in Columbia , Missouri during the period May 8 -- 11 , 2002 .
The conference will last 4 four days and is expected to have70-80 participants among which 20 will be invited speakers.Several world 's leading experts in the emerging connections between combinatorics , analysis and PDE will speak at thisconference .
NSF funds will be use to support travel expensesand room and board for thirty graduate students .
This project is a three-week summer school that looks at the interactions between atmospheric and oceanic sciences on the one hand and modern applied mathematics on the other .
It is built around the three themes of numerics , stochastics and asymptotics .
The numerics component emphasizes the development of modern conservative advection schemes and interface tracking schemes for geophysical transport problems .
The asymptotics component emphasizes the dynamics of balanced flows , reduced models and homogenization .
The stochastics component covers a variety of topics including particle models , stochastic calculus , kinetic theory and applications to Lagrangian stirring and moist convection .
Approximately 15 faculty provide lectures and mentor the students as they conduct short projects to apply the lecture material .
The student body consists of 20 or more graduate students and approximately 12 post-doctoral researchers .
Faculty and students are drawn from both the geosciences and the mathematics communities .
Isosurface extraction and rendering is a useful and popular method for exploring volume datasets.While many studies of extraction techniques have been presented , few researchers have considered how to perform isosurface extraction from very large datasets in a way that utilizes parallel computation while also effectively managing memory access .
For out-of-core datasets ( i.e. , those too large to be processed entirely in main memory ) , delays from access of secondary storage must be minimized if high performance is to be achieved.In this project , an investigation of new techniques for parallel , out-of-core isosurface extraction are conducted .
The work seeks to exploit multiple types of parallelism , effectively organize memory access to minimize access penalties , and to effectively manage inter-process communication .
A hallmark of the workis that it focuses on total system performance rather than attempting to only maximize intermediary measures of a single aspect of performance .
One primary target platform for testing of the techniques is cluster computation environments comprised of commodity CPUs.Intellectual Merit .
The proposed activity can benefit multiple disciplines .
Many scientific and engineering enterprises generate and/or wish to use large datasets .
Some finance and consumer applications also desire to effectively utilize large collections of business data .
Discovery of trends , phenomena , and structures in those datasets can be aided by more efficient visualization .
In particular , for large datasets too large to be processed in-core , the time to compute a visualization is likely to be very high due to the relatively slow access times of the secondary storage .
Reduction of these times by resource ( memory , CPU , and communication ) -effective processing will increase productivity among scientific visualization users and consumers .
In addition , reduction of processing times may make tractable the consideration of certain very large problems .
The proposed activity builds upon prior work of the PI and of the other experiences with parallel out-of-core isosurface extraction .
The PI has access to the necessary computer resources to complete the work , including access to cluster computers at three sites and to supercomputers at three other sites.Due to the impact of the proposed activity on visualization methods that are used across the scientific community , society at large is likely to benefit via new knowledge discovery by thediscipline science that this project aids .
In addition , the proposed work will be beneficial in managing and understanding the increasing body of data being collected about scientific , engineering , and business phenomena .
The project 's results will be disseminated via publication inthe open literature , in conferences , and on the web .
Through the PI 's partnerships with NASA , NIH , and other researchers , the results of the work have a high probability of producing an impact in multiple disciplines .
The project will also aid undergraduate and graduate student training and development via ( 1 ) PI-mentoring of the graduate student supported on the project , ( 2 ) presentation , discussion , and analysis of results at a regular research forum , and ( 3 ) integration of research findings in graduate computer graphics/visualization courses taught by the PI .
P.I .
McNutt , Marcia ( MBARI ) Proposal # 0222650Proposal Title MARS Test Bed for a High-Power , High-Bandwidth , Regional Cabled ObservatoryProject Summary The PIs propose to complete the design and then install an advanced cabled observatory in Monterey Bay that will serve as the engineering testbed for a future cabled ocean observatory .
The Monterey Accelerated Research System ( MARS ) cabled observatory would provide remote , continuous , long-term , high-power , large-bandwidth infrastructure for multidisciplinary , in situ exploration , observation , and experimentation in the deep sea using cutting edge power and communication technologies .
MARS will be located in Monterey Bay offshore the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute ( MBARI ) and will include one science node on 62 km of submarine cable with expansion capability for more nodes in the future .
It is proposed that the science node will provide 4 science ports , and each port will have a 100-Mbit-per- second , bi-directional telemetry channel .
The node will have the ability to deliver a total of 10 kW of power to the 4 ports .
Extension cables can be plugged into any science port to provide power and communications up to 100 km away from the original node using the most cost effective deployment vehicle from several options including MBARI 's ROVs , ships of opportunity , or UNOLS class I , II , III or IV fleet vessels .
MARS will make use of the tools , techniques , and products developed over the last several decades for high reliability submarine telecommunication and military systems to ensure that this system can operate over a 30-year lifetime with minimal life-cycle costs .
The overall goal of this project is to integrate quantitative analysis with biology to provide a systems approach to understanding hepatocyte ( liver ) metabolism in order to gain insights into Type II diabetes .
The specific goals of the project are to ( 1 ) characterize a comprehensive set of metabolic alterations in the hepatocytes induced by environmental factors with the aid of metabolic flux analysis , ( 2 ) incorporate physiochemical information ; namely , kinetic binding data to provide a mechanistic insight into hepatic metabolism beyond that obtained with metabolic flux analysis alone , and ( 3 ) develop a phenomenological model using multivariate analysis to identify candidate pathways or factors that contribute most to the diabetic phenotype .
The objective is the development of a model capable of identifying the potential for diabetes .
This is a collaborative project involving University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and Boston University .
The project will build , deploy , test and package a middleware-oriented distributed account management system .
The system supports the information exchange between grid-enabled systems that are necessary to implement distributed account management , resource allocation , usage accounting , and monitoring functions in a heterogeneous grid environment .
The system will be coupled to the a grid transactions system to form a completely operational , grid-enabled reference implementation .
The ability to manage user accounts , provide access control over its resources , manage allocations and generate usage reports in a distributed fashion is critical to the expansion of the grid .
The proposed system can be used to build a highly automated , scalable account management system that will work across disparate computing systems .
The software will be packaged as an open-source distribution for further development and adaptation by the grid community .
Although most stomatal responses to environmental factors appear to be sensed and transduced within the guard cells , circumstantial evidence suggests that this is not the case for the stomatal response to humidity .
This project investigates the possibility that small changes in turgor pressure in the mesophyll or epidermal cells initiates a cellular signaling pathway that ultimately leads to changes in guard cell osmotic pressure associated with stomatal responses to humidity .
The influence of humidity changes on intercellular concentrations of Ca2+ and components of phosphoinositide signaling pathways will be assessed in both epidermal and mesophyll cells .
HPLC will be used to quantify components of the phosphoinositide signaling pathway , and fluorescent probes will be used to quantify intercellular Ca2+ concentrations .
For the latter experiments , a ratiometric fluorescent calcium indicator protein ( cameleon ) has been expressed in Arabidopsis thaliana .
The project will provide new insights into the mechanism for the stomatal response to humidity .
This response has a major effect on the overall water use efficiency of plants in both natural and agricultural settings .
This workshop will investigate the research issues and future associated with the new field of ubiquitous computing , which is centered on a vision of a world populated by networks of cheap and easily accessible computing devices .
Such a vision has generated a great deal of excitement as there is a potential for improving the quality of our everyday lives .
However , the realization of such a vision requires the resolution of a number of difficult technological and social problems .
One major challenge is the interdisciplinary nature of such an endeavor , which requires coordinated advances in many fields of computer science including network design , security , user interfaces , coordination and collaboration theories , privacy , agent technologies , and mobile computing hardware .
This workshop will focus on 1 ) supporting technology areas , 2 ) promising application areas , 3 ) research issues , and 4 ) evaluation methods .
The steering committee spans both relevant technology and application areas .
Position papers will be invited before the workshop .
Formal papers will be gathered into a book-length manuscript after the workshop .
Wavelets are a relatively new - but increasingly popular - mathematical tool for analyzing data in the geosciences .
Wavelets reexpress data collected over a time span or spatial region such that variations over temporal/spatial scales are summarized in wavelet coefficients .
Individual coefficients depend upon both a scale and a temporal/spatial location , so wavelets are ideal for analyzing geosystems with interacting scales .
In this project , the investigators develop wavelet-based statistical methodology to address three multiscale geophysical problems .
The first is to characterize scale-specific variances/covariances of atmospheric pressure time series from NOAA 's Tropical Atmosphere Ocean buoy array .
Because these series have gaps in them , the investigators construct special wavelets for computing statistically tractable wavelet coefficients .
The second problem is to analyze atmospheric turbulence measurements collected by an aircraft .
The investigators use statistical methodology to combine wavelet coefficients with aircraft heights to determine scale/height variations of winds .
The third problem is to assess spatial/temporal variations in ground-based radar rainfall measurements .
Here the investigators use wavelets to extract spatial gradients , to assess variations in area-mean precipitation , and to determine the variability in the estimated quantities using wavelet-based bootstrapping.The motivation behind this project is to further a scientific understanding of how the atmosphere changes over time , over heights and over different areas .
A better understanding of the atmosphere is important for mankind because of the key role that the atmosphere plays as part of the climate of the earth .
Federal agencies such as NOAA and NASA ( in cooperation with its Japanese counterpart NASDA ) are actively collecting sets of data that directly measure how the atmosphere changes .
These data sets , along with others collected under NSF sponsorship , are inherently complex to interpret .
In this project , the investigators study these data sets using wavelets , which are a mathematical microscope for interpreting changes in complex data sets .
The investigators develop new methods for using wavelets to study atmospheric changes .
In the future , other investigators can apply these new methods to data sets collected in other areas of science such as oceanography , astronomy , agriculture and forestry .
ABSTRACTOCE-0222053OCE-0222046Although the gross features of atmospheric dust transport and deposition to the ocean are well established , major uncertainties remain on the effective solubility of the iron in the dust entering the ocean and the effects of these deposition on the distribution and speciation of iron in the upper ocean .
A PI from the Bermuda Biological Station for Research and a PI from the University of Delaware will participate in two cruises to a site near BATS during summer months to obtain atmospheric and water column samples when dust inputs are at peak values .
Atmospheric samples ( precipitation and mineral aerosols ) will be analyzed for total-dissolvable Fe and Al , as well as readily-soluble Fe and Fe ( II ) .
Seawater samples from the upper water column will be analyzed for total-dissolvable Fe and dissolved Fe and Fe ( II ) in the dissolved ( < 0.4 um ) colloidal ( 0.4-0.03 um ) and soluble ( < 0.03 um ) phases .
Results from this work will be used to determine the effect of atmospheric depositions on the distribution , speciation and biological availability of iron in the upper ocean .
In response to an Announcement of Opportunity for the Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment Program ( GLOBE ) this project is designed to meet GLOBE goals and objectives of linking scientists and schoolchildren in a global information network with the ultimate goal of better understanding Earth 's environment and changes that take place within it .
This proposal consists of various segments addressing GLOBE Program needs support for existing protocols , development of new protocols , and scientific research with GLOBE data .
This proposal will support the development of a new protocol to assess the presence , extent , and duration of jet contrails and cirrus clouds at the same time of day as the other measurements in the Atmosphere suite of GLOBE protocols.Jet contrails , under the right conditions , can generate wide-spread cirrus cloudiness , which has the potential to affect the radiative budget of the planet .
Given increases in jet traffic , the effect by 2050 could increase ten-fold , and be as large as one quarter of the current anthropogenic greenhouse gas radiative forcing .
While models currently exist to predict the potential areas over which contrails can develop and spread , there is no consistent observation program to complement and validate efforts at satellite observation of contrails .
This GLOBE protocol has the potential to fill a gap in observations and research. % % % In response to an Announcement of Opportunity for the Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment Program ( GLOBE ) this project is designed to meet GLOBE goals and objectives of linking scientists and schoolchildren in a global information network with the ultimate goal of better understanding Earth 's environment and changes that take place within it .
This proposal consists of various segments addressing GLOBE Program needs support for existing protocols , development of new protocols , and scientific research with GLOBE data .
This proposal will support the development of a new protocol to assess the presence , extent , and duration of jet contrails and cirrus clouds at the same time of day as the other measurements in the Atmosphere suite of GLOBE protocols.Jet contrails , under the right conditions , can generate wide-spread cirrus cloudiness , which has the potential to affect the radiative budget of the planet .
Given increases in jet traffic , the effect by 2050 could increase ten-fold , and be as large as one quarter of the current anthropogenic greenhouse gas radiative forcing .
While models currently exist to predict the potential areas over which contrails can develop and spread , there is no consistent observation program to complement and validate efforts at satellite observation of contrails .
This GLOBE protocol has the potential to fill a gap in observations and research .
*** ABSTRACTPIs Douglas Lind and Selim Tuncel Proposal DMS-0222452Institution University of Washington This proposal requests funding for a Concentration Year in Dynamical Systems at the University of Washington .
A majorfocus of activity will be a collaborative effort to solvethe Furstenberg Conjecture , a central problem in dynamics.Participants in the program will include a mix of long-termparticipants , including regular faculty , visiting faculty , post-docs , and graduate students at the University of Washington , and short-term visitors .
NSF funds will be used to support graduate student travelto conference and workshops and six junior short termsvisitors .
As the objective of vision ( human and machine ) is to compute a hierarchy of increasingly abstract interpretations of the observed images or image sequences , it is of fundamental importance to know what are the concepts used at each level of interpretation .
In more plain language , what are the visual strokes , visual characters , and visual words ?
Or what are the visual electrons , atoms and molecules ?
The goal of the proposed research is to discover dictionaries of various levels of visual concepts that correspond to fundamental topologic , photometric , geometric , and dynamic structures of the images and scenes .
In a mathematical language , these structures are the low dimensional manifolds embedded in very high dimensional image space .
More specifically , we propose to construct top-down generative models for natural images , 3D surfaces , human faces , video sequences , and 2D shape contours .
The fundamental atomic structures are defined by parameters in the generative models , and these parameters are estimated by fitting the models to the training data .
These structures are intrinsic to the ensemble of natural images and video .
We propose stochastic ( Markov chain Monte Carlo ) learning algorithms which is capable of computing globally optimal solutions .
In response to an Announcement of Opportunity for the Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment Program ( GLOBE ) this project is designed to meet GLOBE goals and objectives of linking scientists and schoolchildren in a global information network with the ultimate goal of better understanding Earth 's environment and changes that take place within it .
This proposal will continue the development of surface ozone observation protocols using a chemically sensitive paper that changes color in response to ozone exposure .
Ozone levels will be estimated by comparing the paper color to a reference color chart .
This will complement and be supported by on-going work at NASA to separate stratospheric ozone from tropospheric and lower atmosphere ozone signals , all of which are detected by space-borne sensors , but are indistinguishable without ground data such as those provided by this method .
The project has the endorsement of the International Global Atmospheric Chemistry Program Steering Committee ( IGAC ) .
Tropospheric and surface ozone are important for different reasons , and introducing students and teachers to the difference in effects of ozone at these different altitudes and to the different sources of ozone is valuable to the learning process .
Accurate observations of surface ozone on the spatial and temporal scales afforded by the GLOBE program will provide a significant advance for science and its study of ozone 's effects on health and biological systems in general .
This project lays out our plan for research and development aimed atdramatically improving the processand outcome of scientific data analysis and visualization .
The improvement will be achieved by coupling an expressive and extensible metadata management framework with novel visualization interfaces that facilitateeffective reuse , sharing , and cross-exploration of visualizationinformation and thus will make a profoundimpact on a broad range of scientific applications .
The process of scientific visualization is inherently iterative .
A good visualization comes from experimenting with visualization and rendering parameters to bring out the most relevant information in the data.This raises a question .
Considering the computer and human time we routinely invest for exploratory andproduction visualization , are there methodologies and mechanisms to enhance not only the productivity ofscientists but also their understanding of the visualization process anddata used ? Recent advances in the field of data visualization have been made mainly in rendering and displaytechnologies ( such as realtime volume rendering and immersive environments ) , but little in coherently managing , representing , and sharing information about the visualization processand results ( images and insights ) .Naturally , the various information about data exploration should be shared and reused to leveragethe knowledge and experience scientists gain from visualizing scientific data .
A visual representation of thedata exploration process along with expressive models for recording and querying task specific informationhelp scientists keep track of their visualization experience and findings , use it to generate new visualizations , and share it with others.While previous research has addressed some related issues , a more comprehensive study remains to bedone .
Thus , we propose two complementary avenues of research ( 1 ) new user interfaces for data visualization tasks , and ( 2 ) expressive metadata models supporting the recording andquerying of information related to data exploration tasks .
In addition , a set of user studies will beconducted on a Web-based visualization testbed realizing ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) in order to refine the proposedmethodologies and designs.Traditional user interfaces can not support the increasingly complex process of scientific data exploration.A fundamental change in the conventional designs and functionality must be made to offer moreintuitive interaction , guidance , and enhanced perception .
We will begin our study with enriching the graphbased and spreadsheet-like interfaces we have developed , and also investigate alternative designs .
An expressive and extensible metadata model representing the data exploration process and its embedded data visualization process is needed .
Such a model along with an appropriate user interface makes it possible to manage diverse information about the input and results of the visualization process , analyze parameter coverage and usage , identify unexplored visualization spaces , and incorporate findings on the process and results in form of visualization metadata .
The model is independent of the actual visual interface used and is open in that its realization in form of a metadata repository can be loosely coupled with a variety of different visualization tools .
A set of interfaces and protocols to the repository will be designed to manage , query , and analyze visualization metadata gathered from and utilized by different visualization tools.Our goal is ambitious and can only be accomplished by working closely with application scientists.They will help us understand application-dependent and independent visualization requirements , processes , and information .
In return , we will offer them a new and greatly improved way to understand their scientificdata , which will help them lead to new discoveries quicker , likely with reduced cost .
Funds are provided for a cruise to collect a suite of cores from the Southwest African margin to construct several detailed depth transects to monitor the full dynamic range and stratal geometry of the mid depth water masses .
The post-cruise proposed research program will establish the sensitivity of Southern Hemisphere ocean circulation to major instability during the Pleistocene and Holocene by mapping changes in the distribution of radiocarbon in benthic foraminifera over specific abrupt events to deduce the ventilation history of mid-depth water and help delineate northern vs. southern sources .
In the last decade , computer systems have increasingly become participants in complex , distributed communities comprising people and computer systems , rather than devices used by individuals .
This major shift engenders a significant challenge for computer science to determine ways to construct computer systems able to act effectively as team members .
Although many current computer systems have sophisticated capabilities as individual actors , most lack capabilities required for working successfully as members of a collaborative group .
This proposal addresses problems central to this challenge .
It focuses on providing the foundation for the design of decision-making components of software agents that can handle multi-agent , dynamic team contexts .
The proposed research comprises three activities ( 1 ) empirical investigations , including examination of the influence on individual and group behavior and outcomes of policies and mechanisms for producing appropriately helpful behavior in collaborative settings and for governing commitment to group activities ; ( 2 ) development of formal theories that may be used to address abstractly questions of these mechanisms ; and ( 3 ) construction of more sophisticatedcollaboration-capable software agents .
The research will contribute to the development of collaboration-capable software agents and collaborative human-computer interface systems , andthus will significantly increase the effectiveness of heterogeneous teams of people and software-systems agents .
The multi-institutional project focuses on a novel integration of video conferencing clients and services with NMI Middleware standards , functions and services .
The outcome will be a videoconferencing application directory enabling secure , inter-domain authentication for calls that transit institutional organizational boundaries .
A testbed for video middleware will be established to test the architecture , its implementation using multiple products , and the interoperability of these products .
Testbed results will be provided to the higher education and research community in the form of a video middleware cookbook .
The project has identified 4 goals .
- develop the NMI Release 1 communications object class for use in H.323 , SIP , MPEG2 , VRVS and Access Grid implementations - develop a framework for specification of videoconferencing security requirements - develop a testbed to deploy and test middleware-ware , inter-operable videoconferencing services.- disseminate the results through conferences , publications including a Video Middleware CookbookThe proposal is based on substantial experience building ViDe.Net , the international videoconferencing service for higher education .
As the global internet becomes a true multi-service infrastructure , use of internet videoconferencing will increase throughout education , including K-12 .
The ability to look up and connect to resources through secure , easy-to-use interfaces will enable greater use of this technology to enhances classroom instruction and overcome geographic and economic disadvantage .
The investigator studies combinatorial problems which arisein various areas of mathematics .
In joint work with R. Guralnick , the investigator examines branched coverings of Riemann surfaceswhose monodromy groups are the symmetric and alternating groupsS_n and A_n acting on subsets of a fixed size from the n-set .
Themain goals of this project are 1 ) to show that with a small and known list of exceptions , the genus of the covering surface must grow with both the number of sheets of the covering and the number of branch points , and 2 ) to determine all such coverings for which the genus of the coveringspace is at most one.This project is one of the final steps in a program initiated byGuralnick and J. Thompson .
In addition , the investigator continues hisstudy of monotone graph and hypergraph properties which arise in V.Vassiliev 's theory of finite type invariants of knots and ornaments.Finally , the investigator continues his examination of order complexesof subgroup lattices of finite groups .
He attempts to use topologicalmethods to distinguish intervals in subgroup lattices of finite groupsfrom arbitrary finite lattices .
With V. Welker , he investigates thetopology of the order complexes of subgroup lattices of finite simplegroups.The investigator 's main interests are in combinatorics , which is thestudy of discrete , usually finite mathematical objects .
Combinatorialobjects arise in various areas of applied mathematics and computerscience , including communications and the theory of algorithmiccomplexity .
Also , there are complicated nondiscrete mathematicalobjects which can be better understood by examining associatedcombinatorial objects .
The investigator studies combinatorial objectswhich arise in this manner .
The Biodiversity Project is requesting funds to plan a national conference on the topic of global biodiversity .
The goal of the conference is to build an education agenda for biodiversity that will identify successful programs , provide strategies for reaching underserved and underrepresented groups , foster collaboration and coordinate financial support for biodiversity across agencies .
The planning process will yield a conference agenda , a list of invitees , a list of potential speakers , goals , themes and activities , as well as identification of model projects .
A budget and fundraising plan will also be developed .
Support is provided for the continued operation of a worldwide network of sites to view the full solar disk at high-resolution in the H-alpha hydrogen resonance line .
Nominally , each of the 5 stations obtains an H-alpha image every minute with 1 arcsecond pixel resolution .
These unique observations are rapidly communicated to the solar-terrestrial community , and provide critical contextual background for the interpretation of satellite data as well as material for student education and research activities .
In-house scientific investigations to be pursued include , ( 1 ) the study of lateral filament oscillations , ( 2 ) the association of filament eruptions with coronal mass ejections , ( 3 ) magnetic field characterization through combined analysis of H-alpha , Global Oscillations Network Group ( GONG ) , and Michelson Doppler Imager ( MDI ) data , and ( 4 ) micro-flare studies through co-ordinated use of Ramaty High Energy Solar Spectroscopic Imager ( RHESSI ) X-ray observations and H-alpha network data .
This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is Object-Oriented Groundwater Data Repository Technology .
Subsurface groundwater systems require large-scale models .
Credible groundwater modeling needs the assemblage of all available information .
Currently , the interpreted groundwater data and calibrated parameters are stored as input files of a code .
All new modeling efforts are generally attempted from scratch .
This object-oriented data repository will systematically store basin data , and will be independent of any groundwater code .
It will have integrated tools to import , edit , view , and export information .
It will have capabilities to convert any model data into a selected repository format .
Integrated tools will provide options to screen water level and chemical data for generating good quality datasets for inverse parameter estimators .
Groundwater is the primary water source for millions of people , agriculture , and industries .
Groundwater modeling is a key requirement for ( 1 ) groundwater management ; ( 2 ) permit applications ; and ( 3 ) each waste site EA , RI/FS , risk assessment , and record of decisions ( ROD ) negotiations .
Anyone using these data will potentially benefit from the use of this data repository .
0233261BelBrunoThis award supports the PI and graduate students from Dartmouth College in a collaboration with Asta Richter of the Institute for Engineering Physics at the University of Applied Sciences-Wildau , Germany .
The German expertise in experimental techniques will be combined with the US expertise in computational modeling will combine to enhance understanding of the nanoindentation process .
The proposed research focuses on the indenter tip-crystal interaction , with particular emphasis on deformation of atomic layers and the creation of defects and cracks at the nanoscale level .
The computational effort , including simulations , will explore the effect of nanoindentation on the surface layers at an atomistic level , looking at correlations between experimental parameters and displacement/elastic processes at the surface .
The experiments will measure mechanical properties of very thin films and composite materials , which will yield quality measures for mechanical properties , like hardness and Young 's modulus , to classify thin film structures on micro-and nanoscales .
The new quality measures are needed to characterize nonomaterials.The project also has an educational objective .
The project will allow the graduate students involved to benefit from performing research in another country .
They will develop a heightened appreciation of the world around them while also learning important new technical skills .
0233483McManusThis three-year award for US-France collaboration in climate change involves researchers at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution and the Laboratory for Climate Sciences and Environment of the French National Center for Scientific Research ( CNRS ) .
Jerry F. McManus in the US and Laurent Labeyrie in France will lead this collaborative program to model and analyze the variability in thermohaline circulation and impact on North Atlantic climate .
The ocean 's thermohaline circulation has undergone reorganization on various time scales , with important implications for understanding the Earth 's climate in the past and present .
Nutrient proxies provide important evidence of watermass reconfigurations .
Dynamical tracers may provide an ideal complement to this information by allowing quantitative evaluation of changes in the rates of deepwater formation and export .
Combination of watermass properties and overturning rate could yield direct estimates of the transport by the ocean 's thermohaline circulation .
To this end , the US and French investigators will refine a method that utilizes two long-lived uranium series , 231 Pa and 230 Th .
They will construct maps of the burial ratio ( 231Pa/230Th ) in bulk sediment cores of the Atlantic Ocean .
In addition , they will evaluate the link between changes in circulation and climate variability through high-resolution time series .
The US group brings to this collaboration expertise in the area of Uranium-series radiochemistry .
This is complemented by French expertise in spatial coverage and resolution and access to the IMAGES cores repository in France.This award represents the US side of joint proposals to the NSF and the French National Center for Scientific Research ( CNRS ) .
NSF will cover travel funds and living expenses for the US investigators .
CNRS will support the visits of the French researchers and a graduate student to the United States .
The project will advance understanding of the causes and potential impact of ocean circulation on climate change and abrupt climate change in the North Atlantic .
This Water Cycle Research ( WCR ) project will investigate the causes and prediction of summer rainfall variability over the continents .
The focus is on coherent patterns of rainfall , which mainly result from organized convection and lower boundary forcing .
Dr. Moncrieff and colleagues , Drs .
Carbone and Davis ( also from NCAR ) , will identify and quantify the predictable components of summertime precipitation , and develop numerical techniques for predicting both extreme and ordinary events .
The research will rely on a unique six-year record ( 1996-2002 ) of radar rainfall observations over the continental United States .
This data set will be analyzed and simulated using a cloud-system resolving model .
The model can explicitly deal with the parameterization challenges arising from the organization and scale-separation in convective precipitation .
The project will improve the modeling and prediction of the coherent rainfall features seen over continental United States during the summer season .
The project 's broader impacts include the socio-economic benefits derived from better hydroclimate forecasts and improved water resource management .
0233318KonradThis three-year award for U.S.-France collaboration in information technology research involves Boston University and the University of Nice at Sophia-Antipolis .
Janusz Konrad and William Karl in the US and Michel Barlaud in France lead the team of investigators and students on a joint project in video segmentation and subsurface sensing .
They will develop new variational methods for segmentation and reconstruction of scenes with dynamic objects , with particular attention to temporal event detection by applying contour-based representations of the underlying object geometry .
The approach builds on the investigators ' previous work in dynamic medical imaging , video segmentation , and image reconstruction .
The US investigators are known for their computational expertise in motion estimation algorithms , motion based segmentation , and image reconstruction .
This is complemented by French expertise in mathematical methods for image and video processing and coding .
The French team is currently pursuing applications using medical data .
This award represents the US side of a joint proposal to the NSF and the French National Center for Scientific Research ( CNRS ) .
NSF will cover travel funds and living expenses for the US investigators and graduate students .
The CNRS will support the visits of the French researchers and to the United States .
US students will benefit from the exchange of scientific techniques and experience with an international research team .
Project Impact at Northeastern University and the Eisenhower Regional Alliance at TERC propose a design project to create a customized technical assistance plan for higher education disciplinary and education faculty that focuses on curriculum use along with the professional development models required for successful implementation .
It is anticipated that these activities will result in more effective provision of services by higher education faculty to teachers and schools in the MSP projects .
It is also anticipated that faculty would incorporate the use of STEM materials and professional development modules into their preservice teaching .
This proposal requests support for six junior US scientists to attend an international conference Dynamical Chaos in Classical and Quantum Physics which will be held at the Budker Institute of Nuclear Physics in Novosibirsk , Russia , August 4-9 , 2003 .
In Dynamical Chaos a deterministic dynamical system can exhibit random behavior even though there are no random parameters in the equation of motion .
This phenomenom has been found to occur in physics , biology , economics and other disciplines .
This conference will attempt to give an overview of the many classical and quantum aspects of the field .
It is being held in Novosibirsk as a tributre to Boris Chirikov , one of the founders of dynamical chaos .
This award supports fundamental theoretical research on the structural and electronic properties of insulating materials , with special emphasis on development of novel techniques for the computation and analysis of these properties .
The objectives are to continue the development of accurate , efficient , robust and informative algorithms for computing the electronic structure of complex materials , and to apply these methods to study several important material systems , especially dielectric oxides.The context of the computational work will primarily be the plane-wave pseudupotential approach to density-functional theory , with the use of ultrasoft pseudopotentials where appropriate .
The novel methodologies that will be applied and developed are ones that give a local real-space picture of electronic and dielectric properties via theoretical concepts connected with Wannier functions , electric polarization , and response to electric fields.Applications will be focused mainly on insulating oxides , either having strong potential for applications , or else having unusual dielectric properties .
A primary thrust will be to study so-called high-K dielectrics , i.e. , insulating oxides having dielectric constants about 20 or higher that could be candidates for the next generation of microelectronics .
A secondary emphasis will be on a newly discovered class of materials having enormous static dioelectric constants .
While recent work by ourselves and others tends to point to an extrinsic mechanism for this enormous dielectric response , there are also anomalies associated with the lattice dielectric response that deserve further investigation .
We also plan to carry forward our previous interests in wide-gap III-V semiconductors by studying screw dislocation in GaN. % % % This award supports theoretical computational research on materials .
The reserach will further develop novel computational techniques to better understand the electronic and structural properties of materials .
These state-of-the-art techniques will then be applied to materials having unusual electrical properties .
Successful completion of this fundamental research will yield new computational methods and a better understanding of materials properties of interest to the microelectronics industry .
*** 0233676GuptaThis proposal addresses the long-standing , fundamental problem of unifying the spatial statistics of floods with its physics .
We propose to address this problem within a newly developing statistical scaling framework .
Statistical scaling is an emergent property of a complex physical system , which is not built into the physical equations a-priori .
Scaling provides a new mathematical framework to link emipirical observations with numerical or analytical solutions of physical processes .
Our objective is to design a pilot study of floods in the Walnut River basin , KS , using the scaling framework .
Special emphasis will be given to the role of scaling in space-time variable rainfall and spatially variable channel network structures in determining the scaling parameters of peak flows .
This proposed pilot study is also a first step to conduct a large-scale cooperative field experiment in the Walnut River basin in Kansas .
We propose to test the scaling framework for peak streamflows using existing observations from the Walnut Gulch basin , AZ , and the Goodwin Creek basin , MS. Tests will also be carried out using GIS-based numerical simulations for these two basins .
In addition , we will simulate peak flows in the Walnut River basin , KS , which is a site for cooperative atmospheric surface exchange studies ( CASES ) .
From the simulation results , we will design a pilot study for strategically gauging the basin to test peak flow scaling .
The scaling framework unifies spatial flood statistics with its physics , and thereby addresses a longstanding fundamental open problem in hydrologic sciences and engineering .
The body of new knowledge under scaling provides the scientific foundations for solving the long-standing applied problem of prediction of floods and low flows from ungauged and poorly gauged basins .
The scaling framework can be used to detect the effects of man-made changes on landscape and changes in climate on floods on a global basis .
This is a cooperative interdisciplinary proposal involving scientists and engineers from the University of Colorado , Boulder , the U.S. Geological Survey and the University of Iowa .
Power distribution voltages and insulation are areas of critical importance to the study of SSP systems .
Due to the importance of the mass and cost of the SSP system , most designs for the SSP operate at high voltages in order to reduce transmission losses and mass .
Some design concepts even use no insulation .
Use of these high voltages will present challenges of electrical breakdown and performance of insulators , insulation , and switchgear .
As a result , there is a strong research motivation for technology geared towards enhancement of PMAD systems exposed to electrical breakdown and corona type faults .
In harsh environments ( aerospace ) , economic and effective fault management ( maintenance and monitoring of electric power systems ) is needed to ensure high performance .
In the effective fault management of the aerospace environment , the maintenance cost of aging distribution cables is a major consideration .
The installation and maintenance of the equipment on board the SSP is also of high significance .
These operations can be significantly improved by more accurate predictions of insulating aging , as well as detection and location of faults within the components of the power system .
This project will focus on the design of an integrated system using state-of-the-art technology for continuous and periodic monitoring of a space power system with emphasis on the detection and diagnosis of corona and soft faults .
This scheme involves the cost effective , efficient monitoring and control for an enhanced space solar power network .
A network of sensors will monitor the network , report information for the detection of faults , and provide health-status information of electrical insulation and other components in the system .
The Center for Energy Systems and Control ( CESaC ) , Howard University is one of the research centers in the US that has demonstrated capabilities in the following combination of fields Power system analysis in the terrestrial , non-terrestrial , naval systems , and spacecraft energy power systems ; Application of optimization techniques to improve the solution of different problems , and applications of intelligent systems to the solution of complex problems .
This combination is necessary for completion of the complex interdisciplinary tasks that will be faced in this project .
The project will create an opportunity for students from differing branches of electrical engineering - material sciences , communications , power systems and controls - to become aware of modern problems in the power industry and contribute to the technical progress in this field .
The project explores a nonlinear IV approach to inference in general nonstationary panels with unit roots .
The approach relies on the standard IV methods with instruments constructed from nonlinear transformations of integrated processes .
Though the methodology is very simple to implement , it provides extremely effective tools for testing unit roots in panels .
Our tests for unit roots in panels are simply based on individual nonlinear IV t-ratios , which are nothing but the usual t-ratios based on the IV estimators using as instruments the integrable transformations of lagged levels .
Such nonlinear IV based tests have many desirable properties and can be used for very general models .
The test statistics have Gaussian limit distributions at each cross- sectional level , and more importantly , they are asymptotically independent across different cross-sectional units .
The asymptotic Gaussianity and independence indeed hold under very mild conditions that allow for cross-sectional dependency and heterogeneity .
In contrast , virtually all of the related work done previously assumes either cross- sectional independence or specific forms of dependency across individual units .
Needless to say , the assumption of cross-sectional independence is highly unrealistic for many economic panels of interest .
Any presumption on the form of cross-sectional dependency may also severely restrict the applicability of the tests .
Our asymptotics only require the time dimension to be large , so the tests are valid for panels with both large and small cross-sectional dimensions .
The proposed tests for unit roots allow not only for the cross-sectional dependencies of nnovations , but also for the presence of cointegration across cross-sectional units in levels .
Unbalanced panels and panels with heterogeneous individual shortrun dynamics and cross-sectionally related dynamics are also permitted .
The proposed tests also make it possible to more carefully formulate the unit root and cointegration hypotheses in panels , and use order statistics to test for and against the presence of unit roots and cointegrationin only a fraction of individual units .
None of the currently available tests can be used to test for unit roots in such general panels .
Some preliminary simulations indicate that our nonlinear IV based tests perform very well in finite samples even for panels with relatively small time and cross-sectional dimensions .
Not Available 0233242WattersAs in most filamentous fungi , growth of Neurospora crassa begins by highly polarized cell extension that leads to the formation of a hyphal tube of uniform diameter .
The continuously extending tip sends off periodic branches , which are themselves , capable of extension and branching .
There are few other biological systems that develop in this manner .
New branches normally emerge a short distance behind the apex of the extending tip and grow at an angle to the main hypha and are referred to as 'lateral ' branches .
Under normal conditions the majority of branch points form laterally , but alternate branch morphology is seen at a minority of branch points .
In this minority morphology , the two tips emerge at an angle to the previous direction of growth forming a forked structure .
These are referred to as 'dichotomous ' or 'apical ' branch points .
In this project , the genetics of control of branch morphology will be examined .
The project will focus on the lateral/dichotomous dimorphism observed in Neurospora crassa .
The project is expected to advance along two independent fronts .
First , the collection of morphological mutations will be expanded by screening for suppressors of a select group of known morphological mutations .
In this phase of the project , the focus will be on mutations that cause a shift in favor of dichotomous branching .
This is expected to uncover suppressors which act on specific branching mutants , and hopefully will also recover those which are capable of at least partially suppressing the branching effect on a wider selection of morphological mutations , acting , in effect , as low-branching mutants .
Such mutations are largely unknown in Neurospora .
Second , the morphological effects of cold shock will be further examined .
In Neurospora , temperature shifts ( 25 to 4 ) have been shown to cause a dramatic , but temporary branching effect .
One phase of the response is characterized by a switch in morphology to all dichotomous branching .
By screening for mutants with altered responses to cold shock , genes responsible for the developmental switch between branch morphologies should be identified.Filamentous fungi play a large role in human affairs .
They are major recyclers of biomass and a significant source of losses in agriculture and lumber production as pathogens and agents of spoilage .
They affect both producers ( loss of product , cost of antifungal actions ) and consumers ( increased costs , food spoilage , decomposition of wood products ) and thus have a significant economic impact .
An increase in our understanding of tip growth and branching in fungi would prove useful for more direct control of the growth of the organism .
The project should prove useful to batch culturing technologies , control of fungi in material subjected to temperature shifts , and should expand our understanding of the growth of filamentous fungi in the field .
The objective of the annual meetings of the West Coast Bacterial Physiologists ( WCBP ) is to foster communication among established investigators , postdoctoral fellows and graduate students working in the broad area of microbial physiology .
Started in the 1940.s by C. B. van Niel for his associates on the West Coast , participants now come from Canada , the Midwest and the East Coast of the USA .
This is one of the few conferences in North America that have retained a focus on microbial physiology , with a primary , but not exclusive , emphasis on the physiology of prokaryotic microorganisms .
The conference especially provides a forum for graduate students and postdoctoral fellows to present and discuss the results of their research projects utilizing experimental systems ranging from model organisms to those of specific relevance to pathogenic and environmental microbiology .
The conference has been held continuously since 1963 over a weekend in the middle of December at the Asilomar Conference Center in Pacific Grove , California .
The annual meeting is announced in August and September by direct mailings and by posting on the WCBP web site ( http//wcbacterialphysiologists.ucdavis.edu ) .
The meeting is organized with four formal sessions ( Friday evening , Saturday morning and evening , and Sunday morning ) and four unstructured informal sessions ( Friday afternoon and late evening , and Saturday afternoon and late evening ) .
Each of the four formal sessions is initiated with a 45 min overview lecture .
The overview lectures are endowed by the Genentech Corporation and identified as the John Ingraham Lectures in Microbial Physiology .
The John Ingraham Lecturers may be principle investigators , postdoctoral fellows or graduate students .
They are selected by the conference co-directors on the basis of scientific merit and current high profile research topic of relevance to microbial physiologists .
The overview lectures are followed by offered papers of 15 or 20 min duration .
Typically , 7-9 and 5-7 offered papers are scheduled for the morning and evening sessions , respectively , depending on the number of abstracts submitted .
No graduate student submitting an abstract has been denied a chance to present her/his data and conclusions .
A registration fee covers lodging , food , meeting room expenses and support for the informal sessions .
A differential between the registration fees for graduate students and all other participants has traditionally been preserved .
NSF funding will be applied to maintain at least a 20 % lower registration fee for graduate students and go toward support of poster sessions , if the participants desire such sessions .
This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project will conduct research and develop prototypes of an Earth Systems science-learning program for secondary schools .
The product will consist of a DVD-ROM that combines a library of high-resolution visualizations with an inquiry-based curriculum and the ability to update with new content from web sites on the Internet .
Building on WorldLink Media 's previously published CD product , Interactive Earth , the investigative team will research and prototype an advanced tool set for data analysis and image interpretation that will enable students to inquire , hypothesize , analyze , discover , and communicate with peers , replicating the work of real scientists .
Using NASA 's Earth Observatory and Visible Earth web sites as a test case , the Phase I research will define Web protocols that let users seamlessly upload data and imagery into the DVD-ROM interface .
TERC , a research and education organization will evaluate teacher needs and develop a curriculum framework that aligns with the National Science Education Standards .
This project recognizes the vital interplay between a curriculum developer ( TERC ) , a data provider ( NASA ) and a tool-builder ( WorldLink ) in creating exemplary materials .
Principal commercial applications include a DVD-ROM and curriculum package for schools , a DVD program for homes and libraries , and an interactive multimedia resource for museums and science centers .
The proffered technology will not only contribute to earth science learning but also to solving information management problems dealing with large amounts of data effectively in a classroom setting .
0233145YoungThis award supports the PI and postdoctoral students from Emory University in a collaboration with Inga Neumann of the Institute for Zoology at the University of Regensburg , Germany .
The combined efforts of the German and US groups will focus on their shared interest in the role of the neuropeptides oxytocin and vasopressin in the regulation of social behavior and stress coping .
The US group at the NSF Center for Behavioral Neuroscience focuses on the role of oxytocin and vasopressin in social attachment of the monogamous rodent species the prairie vole .
Studies suggest that oxytocin and vasopressin are released in the nucleus accumbens and ventral pallidum during mating , which trigger the pair bond formation .
There is , however , no direct evidence of peptide release during mating in the monogamous voles .
This issue will be addressed in the collaboration using in vivo microdialysis and sensitive radioimmunoassay .
The German group is the only one in the world to have successfully measured oxytocin and vasopressin release in behaving rodents.The project also has an educational objective .
The project will allow the postdoctoral students involved to benefit from performing research in another country .
They will develop a heightened appreciation of the world around them while also learning important new technical skills .
0233259SchopfThis award supports William Schopf from the University of California-Los Angeles in a collaboration with Wolfgang Heckl of the Center for Nanoscience at the University of Munich , Germany .
The project will focus on the development of a new paleontological technique that will be useful in identification of Precambrian cellular microfossils and their remains .
Through the use of atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) , the researchers intend to investigate the morphology of microfossils previously located and identified by older methods of microscopy , in order to learn about the nanostructure of the fossil remains .
The principal investigator on the German side is a pioneer in the application of AFM to biological and geobiological problems and will contribute unique expertise to the research team .
Results from this work will have a definite impact on the current debate over the nature of pre-Cambrian fossils and will also be applicable to the study of organic matter from other plants and so have a broader impact .
Not Available This project is a three-year continuation of a theoretical and experimental study of the dynamics of liquid water existing at the boundaries of ice crystal at temperatures below the freezing point of pure water .
This process , called premelting , has significant consequences in the redistributing of brine in sea ice , the apparent migrating of contaminants through glacier ice , and the rate of frost heave and weathering in soils and rocks.Premelting is common to virtually all types of materials , but has been most extensively studied in ice .
It can be caused by adsorption forces , wetting , size effects , or substrate disorder , and involves many aspects of surface physics and phase transition phenomena .
The study program will include the observing of ice crystal growth from a contaminated solution ; of unfrozen water transport between crystals as functions of temperature and temperature differences , as well as such studies between ice crystals and various substrates .
An important objective will be the development of useful models for ice growth and impurity transport under natural conditions in order to assess how grain interfaces may serve as chemical conduits .
The macroscale consequences of these molecular-scale processes include the evolution of the electromagnetic properties of sea ice which are important in remote sensing , the uptake of chlorine on polar stratospheric cloud particles which are important in the chemistry of ozone destruction , the migration of impurities in ice cores which affect the stratigraphic isochrone estimates , and the penetration of atmospheric pollutants into permafrost and firn .
The Water Cycle Research ( WCR ) project will determine watershed scale evaporation - a key component of the hydrologic cycle - from a concerted strategy involving field observations and numerical simulations of the field campaigns .
Determination of regional-scale evaporation , particularly , over heterogeneous land surfaces remains challenging due to intermittency of the turbulent transport .
Dr. Parlange , and colleagues , Drs .
Meneveau and Thomas ( all at Johns Hopkins University ) will use passive remote sensing tools to obtain detailed profiles of temperature and humidity in the boundary layer at several nearby locations .
The field observations will be simulated using state-of-the-art large eddy simulation models , in an effort to extract meaningful linkages between surface heterogeneity and mixing in the boundary layer region .
The project will lead to improved modeling and prediction of watershed scale evaporation , with beneficial consequences for characterization of regional hydrological variability and change .
The project is administered by the Large-scale Dynamic Meteorology program .
0233299EckertThis award supports the PI , a junior faculty member , and a graduate student from Georgia Tech in a collaboration with Roger Glaeser of the Institute for Chemical Technology at the University of Stuttgart , Germany .
The combined efforts of the German and US groups will focus on making better predictions of phase behavior of gases , supercritical fluids , and liquids .
They will apply the new understanding of phase behavior to the improvement of rates and selectivities in heterogeneous catalyzed reactions at elevated pressures , especially those involving supercritical fluids .
Many current experiments on catalyzed reactions lack information on the number of phases present , which phase is present during the reaction , and whether reactions are rate or mass-transfer limited .
The present work will delineate both phase boundaries and reaction conditions to enable meaningful studies of heterogeneous catalyzed reactions at elevated pressures.The project also has an educational objective .
The project will allow the graduate students and junior faculty involved to benefit from performing research in another country .
They will develop a heightened appreciation of the world around them while also learning important new technical skills .
Costantino9981374 Understanding the fluctuations in animal numbers is acentral issue in population biology that has far-reaching impacton and implications for problems ranging from food production tothe conservation of species .
Nonlinear dynamics opens the way toa new phase of population research in which theory andexperimentation focus on phenomena such as cycles andquasi-periodicity , chaos and strange attractors , multipleattractors and complicated basins of attraction , saddle sets andtheir stable manifolds , and so on .
This interdisciplinaryproject , in which Robert Costantino , Jim Cushing , Brian Dennis , Robert Desharnais , and Shandelle Henson collaborate , covers aspectrum of activities essential to testing nonlinear populationtheory the translation of the biology into the language ofmathematics and back again , the analysis of deterministic andstochastic models , the development and application of statisticaltechniques for the analysis of data , and the design andimplementation of biological experiments .
A series of experimentswith flour beetles of the genus Tribolium provide rigorousexperimental tests of nonlinear phenomena .
Topics includenonlinearity in the context of stochasticity , chaos andpopulation control , the impact of periodic environments on animalabundance , demographic dynamics and natural selection , nonequilibrium species interactions , and statistical questionsconcerning parameterization and validation of models .
With a sound understanding of the underlying dynamics ofanimal populations , ecologists can anticipate the consequences ofenvironmental degradation and learn better ways to manage naturalpopulations and control populations of pests .
For example , one ofthe experiments suggests that , by taking advantage of thesensitivity to initial conditions that is the hallmark of achaotic system , managers can dramatically decrease pestpopulation numbers without the use of chemical pesticides bymaking small perturbations at critical times .
The marriage ofecological theory and experiments by the interdisciplinaryresearch team leads to new techniques for the application ofmathematics to ecological problems .
The project is supported bythe Applied Mathematics , Computational Mathematics , andStatistics programs in MPS and the Population Biology and Ecologyprograms in BIO .
This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will assess the technical and commercial feasibility of SoftPDA , a wireless software platform for enterprise applications .
The platform is focused on modeling business processes and automating business critical tasks for wireless device users .
As a result of this approach , the platform addresses some of the well-known deficiencies of wireless devices .
Suchdeficiencies have made wireless devices clumsy or inappropriate for compute-intensive tasks .
The result of this research will be detailed design of that platform along with the algorithms necessary to enable it .
The results of have applicability to a wide base of mobile professionals utilizing wireless devices to conduct business , including sales personnel , executives , consultant , attorneys , and finanical personnel engaged in any business enterprise .
The results are also relevant to mobile workers in vertical markets such as field service and medicine .
9970325Professor Mubayi plans to undertake research in graph theory with emphasis on Ramsey theory , hypergraph coloring , connectivity of cages , and graph covering .
The main thrust of his project is to study variations of problems in Ramsey Theory posed by Paul Erdos .
He will also develop the coloring theory of mixed hypergraphs , investigate the connectivity properties of cages , and study a new problem related to graph covering.The proposed research falls into the general area of combinatorics .
One of the goals of combinatorics is to find efficient methods to study arrangements of objects .
These methods are extremely important to modern communications .
For example , the design of large networks , such as those occurring in telephone systems or internet providers , deal with finite sets of objects and require combinatorial analysis .
Ramsey theory studies the conditions under which certain substructures in a discrete setting are forced to appear .
It has applications to efficient information retrieval , to clear communication with noisy channels , and to the effect of failure of intermediate facilities in a communication network .
NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0072008Mathematical Sciences Derivation and Simulation in Radiative Transfer TheoryAbstract0072008 BalThis project studies the propagation of high frequency waves in highly heterogeneous media .
Radiative transport theory provides an accurate macroscopic description of the microscopicinteractions between the propagating waves and the rapidly-fluctuating underlying medium .
The objectives of the research are threefold .
First , extend radiative transport theory to include boundary conditions and surface and volume wave interaction .
Second , solve the volume and surface equations numerically using a Monte Carlo method based on a probabilistic representation of radiative transfer with polarization .
Finally , assess the domain of validity of radiative transfer by setting up suitable inverse problems that allow determination of statisticalparameters characterizing the underlying medium from boundary measurements.A major recent success of radiative transport theory is the modeling of the propagation of seismic waves in the earth 's crust .
Numerical study of seismic wave propagation over hundreds of kilometers remains prohibitive with a microscopic model , but simulations are now accessibleusing radiative transfer theory and suitable statistical methods .
Results promise to yield better understanding and prediction of earthquakes .
Another application of radiative transport and its diffusion approximation is near-infrared spectroscopy .
This novel method is increasinglyused in medical imaging for monitoring properties of human tissues .
Numerical simulation of forward and inverse transport problems remains an active field of research .
The project provides the mathematical and numerical analysis to address these issues .
The proposed project is an empirical study of the effects of MSP projects on student achievement , and it includes providing technical assistance to approximately 15 MSP evaluators regarding MSP evaluation challenges and the use of appropriate analytic tools and techniques for studying the impacts of MSPs .
The proposed three-year project has three goals 1 ) to increase the knowledge of MSP evaluators about design , indicators , and conditions needed to successfully measure change in student learning over time , 2 ) to develop useful tools for evaluators to attribute outcomes to MSP activities , and 3 ) to apply different techniques for analyzing the relationship between student achievement and MSP project activities in order to evaluate the success of MSP projects .
AST-0098048Bunn , E.F.This research will improve methods of analysis for large data sets in Cosmic Microwave Background ( CMB ) studies , including refinements of algorithms for analyzing large maps and removing foreground contamination .
The methods will be tested using simulations , and then applied to datasets generated by BEAST , an existing balloon-borne telescope for measuring CMB anisotropies , and eventually all-sky satellite observations .
Extraction of statistics beyond the simple power spectrum , such as non-gaussianity and isotropy of the fluctuations , is the main goal of the research .
*** The objective of this RCN project is to establish an interactive community of researchers and students in the area of molecular structure and dynamics of macromolecular assemblies , with a specific focus on the forefront technology of solid-state NMR .
This project will foster communication of ideas and allow exposure to off-campus equipment facilities for six research groups at the City University of New York ( CUNY ) , the New York Structural Biology Center , Columbia University , and New York University .
The networking will be accomplished through an ongoing seminar series held at participating institutes across New York City ; an annual symposium held alternately at the CUNY Graduate Center and at the New York Structural Biology Center ; an annual hands-on workshop rotating among different laboratories of the core participants ; a communications system for teleconferencing and video conferencing ; and an interactive website that will announce the activities described above and allow technical networking among the researchers located at the various sites .
These programs will facilitate the ability of both junior and well-established investigators to exchange ideas and results , form collaborations in real time , and advance the field of solid-state NMR as it applies to biopolymers and macromolecular assemblies .
In addition , the seminars and website will reach a broad array of researchers and students who would not otherwise have ready access to state-of-the-art NMR methods and experimental results on the molecular structure of biological solids .
These individuals include research counterparts in locations distant from New York City as well as local faculty and students .
Importantly , the Research Coordination Network will include a significant population of minority students , who comprise 69 % of CUNY 's student population .
This Small Business Innovation Research ( SBIR ) Phase I project seeks to develop and commercialize novel monodisperse ceramic membranes and membrane-reactors .
Our innovation is based on self-organized anodic alumina with precisely engineered porous structure and previously unattainable pore size ( down to1 nm or less ) , greatly enhanced chemical and thermal stability , and superb mechanical properties .
Commercially available anodic alumina membranes have limited practical application due to their fragility , susceptibility to acid and base attack , as well as the lack of membranes with pore size smaller than 100 nm for symmetrical membranes .
The proposed approach addresses these limitations by combining innovative synthesis of highly ordered nanoporous anodic alumina with symmetrical porosity , conversion of anodic alumina into polycrystalline ceramic while preserving its morphology , and conformal deposition of functional layers .
The proposed technology will enable the fine-tuning of the pore diameter in the ranges from below 1 nm to 200 nm .
Deposition of materials inside the nanopores will afford desired functionality .
The membranes will target selected applications , such as fuel cell reformers sized for Next Generation Vehicles , integrated mesoscopic power sources for micro-electromechanical systems ( MEMS ) , as well as future portable energy sources .
The field of Solid Freeform Fabrication ( SFF ) has developed significantly over the fast 15 years .
The ability to make a part quickly with minimal imitations on geometric shape has spawned applications in the fields of transportation , medicine , the military , microelectronics , and others .
With this growth has developed the need for researchers to meet to discuss fundamental and developmental issues of SFF .
The annual SFF Symposium was first held in 1990 to provide a forum for technical exchange of all aspects of SFF materials , process development , physical and computational modeling , and applications .
It is the oldest continuous meeting in the area and is reputed to be one of the top research meetings in the world.From the beginning , the philosophy of the SFF Symposium Organizing Committee of student involvement has been crucial to the success of the meeting and the field .
Student involvement is encouraged by offering a student registration rate that is approximately one-third of the regular rate and which for the last several years have in fact been below the per capita break-even cost .
This subsidy has been effective in attracting students .
In 2001 , approximately 32 % of the entire meeting was students .
Participants represented 38 universities ( 13 international universities ) .
The interaction with the scientific leaders of the field is beneficial to these young scientists and represents an investment in the future of the US scientific infrastructure .
This is an NSF Social and Economic Sciences grant in the history of science for start-up funds in support of research following the PI 's two years as a NSF Minority Post-Doctoral Fellow .
It supports on a cost sharing basis with the PI 's institution research infrastructure costs ( travel and research assistance ) to perform research in Africa on celestial navigation .
The project utilizes findings from the NSF postdoctoral project on the celestial navigation practices at sites in Tunisia , Fiji , and the United States .
A theory of the decision-making process behind the adoption or rejection of new technologies emerged from that research ; the theory will be tested during this preliminary study .
Celestial navigation is a practical method of finding one 's position by use of the stars , Sun , Moon , or other celestial bodies .
The compass and the Global Positioning System ( GPS ) have spread globally and provide an accurate means of position determination .
However , many cultures have rejected these technologies in favor of their traditional navigation methods including celestial navigation .
This preliminary investigation seeks to document navigation practices at two sites in East Africa Massawa , Eritrea , and Lamu Island , Kenya .
At each site details of the local navigation methods and navigation equipment that is available will be recorded .
If there is a celestial part to their navigation , then the following aspects of the navigators and their communities will be examined how do people learn to navigate and are their techniques being taught to the next generation of navigators ; what is the role of new navigation equipment and new techniques ; how is the decision made as to whether to adopt or reject new navigation technologies ; and what is the role of women in navigation ?
The methodology involves ethnographic field techniques including formal and informal interviews and participant observation .
A record of local navigation methods and culture will be created via digital images , videotapes , field notes and sound recordings .
In an effort to train students in the skills necessary to complete a multi-site research project , students will be asked to participate in several aspects of this project archival research , fieldwork , preservation of materials , and documentation .
In a continuing effort to increase the number of women and minorities in the sciences by offering courses focusing on non-Western cultures and scientific traditions , the results of this project will be incorporated into undergraduate courses on the anthropology of Africa and on the history of science , technology , and medicine of Africa .
This project will increase our knowledge of African indigenous knowledge systems as well as make a positive contribution to the history of science , technology , and medicine in non-Western cultures .
It will compare current navigation techniques with those recorded by Ibn Majid ( in 1489 A.D. ) , adding another chapter to the history of navigation of Africa and the Indian Ocean .
It will record for what appears to be the first time the navigation techniques of the Afar people of Eritrea .
0233583Aizen The evaluation of the long-term dynamics of water cycle components in the World 's largest closed drainage system has not been examined in detail .
Location of the Tien Shan and rich data provide a unique opportunity to assess the pathways of water among hydrological surface and subsurface reservoirs and to quantify the precipitation partitioning among land surface stores with different residence times .
The main objective of our research is estimating , simulating , and predicting the variability in water cycle components and water composition in the Central Asian alpine basins .
This project proposes to ( 1 ) Provide background information and evaluate the long-term changes in type and quantity of precipitation , evaporation , total river runoff and snow/glacier/permafrost runoff , major ions , pH , conductivity , and dissolved oxygen .
This data will be posted at the University of Idaho web site ( www.mines.uidaho.edu/~aizen/aizen.html ) .
( 2 ) Discover the controls on the water chemistry ( changes in glacier , snow , and permafrost river runoff , atmospheric deposition , rock weathering , etc. ) .
Define the input/output chemical budget emphasizing on the watershed geology .
( 3 ) Implement modular-design , deterministic , distributed-parameter modeling systems i.e. , Precipitation Runoff Modeling System and/or snow-ice simulation with Snowmelt Runoff Model in application with the operational runoff modeling , which simulates active layer freezing and thawing .
Geochemical modeling includes specification of the various elements and determination of saturation indices for various metals based on MINTEQA2 and WATEQ .
Mass-balance calculations will be facilitated by computer codes such as BALANCE , NETPATH and PHREEQE .
Validation of simulation results will be based on data sets other than those used in model calibration .
( 4 ) Develop and validate the transition from small hydrological units to complex geographical systems through the scaling relationships and to determine the distribution of point measurements .
Three representative sub-basins will be used to determine water balances using data during each time step ( daily , monthly , seasonally , and annually ) .
( 5 ) Apply climate scenarios to assess the climate-driven impact on future water resources and model the effect of global warming on water chemistry .
The basis of this integrative research is the collaboration with the Central Asian , the USA , the Japan , and the Chinese institutions .
This project is a modeling study of processes that control the concentrations of oxidants at northern mid and high latitudes over North America .
A suite of 1-D , regional 3-D , and global 3-D models will be used to analyze airborne observations collected during the Tropospheric Ozone Production about the Spring Equinox Experiment ( TOPSE ) .
Major scientific issues to be examined include ( 1 ) the altitude and latitude distributions of the springtime O3 maximum and factors contributing to the variation in the spatial distributions ; ( 2 ) the correlations among O3 , NOx , NOy , CO , and hydrocarbons by time and latitude and their implications on the origin of the springtime O3 maximum and sources of HOx and NOx ; ( 3 ) the impact of halogen radicals on chemistry in the Arctic and vicinity in spring .
These studies will involve assessing the relative roles of transport and chemistry in the tropospheric chemistry of this region .
Dr. Wang is collaborating with Yongqiang Liu , Georgia Institute of Technology , ATM-0000338 .
0233264NeimanThis award supports the PI , co-PI , and graduate students from the University of Missouri-St. Louis in a collaboration with Peter Tass of the Institute for Medicines at the Research Center Juelich , Germany .
The joint research effort will combine theoretical and experimental studies of mechanisms of stochastic synchronization and de-synchronization for deep brain stimulation therapy of Parkinson 's disease by the German group and experimental electrophysiological and theoretical modeling of stochastic synchronization and phase resetting in electroreceptors of paddlefish by the US group .
The specific goal of the collaboration is to understand general mechanisms for controlling synchronization in noisy oscillating neurons and to validate the effectiveness and neural basis of novel stimulus protocols developed by the German group for treating Parkinson 's patients by deep brain stimulation.The project also has an educational objective .
The project will allow the graduate students involved to benefit from performing research in another country .
They will develop a heightened appreciation of the world around them while also learning important new technical skills .
0233810HeinemanThis dissertation enhancement award supports a graduate student from William Heineman 's lab at the University of Cincinnati during here two-month tenure in the lab of Gunther Wittstock in the Department of Chemistry at the University of Oldenburg , Germany .
The goal of the research is to develop an ultrasensitive and miniaturized immunoassy applicable to clinical diagnostics and detection of biowarfare agents .
The goal will be met using scanning electrochemical microscopy in to perform and detect the immunoassay .
Using microbeads as a mobile solid phase for immounoassay increases the surface area to volume ratio , since they can be dispersed without solution , which minimizes diffusion distances .
This research could lead to new technologies for high-density chip-based testing systems and could benefit in the detection of biowarfare agents such as toxins , bacteria , spores , and viruses.The project also has a clear educational objective .
The project will allow a graduate student to benefit from performing research in another country .
She will develop a heightened appreciation of the world while also learning important new technical skills .
Ms. Kira Blaisdell-Sloan will collect data for her doctoral dissertation under the supervision of Dr. Rosemary Joyce .
Ms. Blaisdell-Sloan will continue her archaeological excavations at the site of Rancho Ires , located in the Ulua River Valley , in Honduras .
Rancho Ires was occupied continuously from the Postclassic ( c. AD1400 ) to Late Colonial period ( c. AD1800 ) .
This long occupational span is unusual for colonial period indigenous sites in Honduras .
Such long term occupation allows archaeologists to explore the changing nature of contact to colonial period life through the archaeological examination of differences in architecture , diet , trade goods , and locally produced goods both between different households at a given time and within a given households over multiple generations .
This project will use an agent-centered approach to examine the varied and changing strategies of cultural retention and identity creation employed by individuals and groups of individuals living at Rancho Ires as their traditional social and economic networks were disrupted and new ones formed.An agent-centered approach will place a critical focus upon the strategic choices that people ( as individuals and groups ) made as they interacted with colonial powers beyond their control .
Rancho Ires provides an ideal situation to use such an approach .
Ethnohistorical research indicates that the Ulua Valley , one of the most fertile river valleys in Central America , was of considerable inter-regional economic importance before the arrival of the Spanish .
When the Spanish arrived and attempted to dominate the area , they were met with hostility , and conflict ensued .
The seat of this resistance was a town called Quitamay .
Based on ethnohistorical and archaeological research , the archaeological site of Rancho Ires appears to be the town identified in the documentary as Quitamay .
Despite their initial rejection of the Spanish and the disruptions caused by Spanish domination , documentary and preliminary archaeological evidence indicates that the settlement continued to have dealings with the Spanish .
To address the dynamic nature of the intercultural contact experienced by the residents of the community of Quitamay from an agent-centered perspective , this project will focus on the domestic group .
Though there have been explicitly agent-centered approaches to culture contact and colonialism , as yet these have not been rooted in household archaeology .
However , the household is the finest scale at which we , as archaeologists , can identify discrete cooperative groups .
These then will be linked to larger perspectives , allowing for an understanding of the relationship between individuals , groups communities and cultures.The significance of this research is threefold .
First , it will provide the data to test the efficacy of an agent-centered approach to contact and colonization in a household context .
Second , it will contribute specific archaeological knowledge of under documented colonial settings in Latin America .
Beyond being a matter of simple historical curiosity , our understanding of these early contacts between Aboriginal and European people is important because they shaped many subsequent developments in the countries in which they occurred .
In Spanish America in particular , current race relations , systems of inequality , social stratification and many issues of identity relate back to the original colonial setting .
Finally , as a doctoral project , this project will also aid in the training of a young scientist with great potential .
0233284HendersonWaste heat transfer and management constitutes one of the major issues for devices in space development - - whether for electronics , solar cells , concentrators or other elements.This project proposes the development of a very novel planar micro Loop Heat Pipe ( LPH ) to accomplish this purpose , based upon a potentially revolutionary Coherent Porous Silicon ( CPS ) configuration as the integrated wick.The LHP provides a circulating fluid , which carries away massive heat by virtue of the latent heat of phase transformation from liquid to vapor , and the vapor condenses back to liquid at the condenser , where it drops the latent heat ( to be radiated ) .
The liquid is returned to the surface to be cooled by the all-important wick which serves as the engine for circulation - - thus requiring no other external power except for the waste heat itself.The wick works by capillary action , and the CPS wick is the revolutionary element , where a batch photoelectrochemical process has been developed to place many thousands of coherent uniform worm holes of micron size vertically through an ordinary ( 100 ) silicon wafer which when oxidized produce wicks of enormous capillary sucking pressure .
A flat ( planar ) cooling surface results directly .
Moreover , silicon is an ultralight material .
Areas may be made as extensive as needed , with calculated cooling capacities of 300 or more W/cm2 .
This proposal from George Washington University and its partner , the Potomac Communication Group , is aimed at designing a system to develop the capacity of the MSPs to use , generate and disseminate knowledge about educational improvement .
The goals are to identify promising dissemination practices , identify what knowledge decision -makers need , and develop a preliminary framework for the dissemination of activities and findings of the MSPs .
There are five research questions 1 ) What are the information needs of key education decision-makers ?
2 ) What contextual factors influence or motivate the use of knowledge in decision making ?
3 ) What are the information pathways used by the decision-makers to access information ?
4 ) What barriers or motivating factors are present in accessing and using the knowledge to transform STEM education ?
5 ) What knowledge dissemination strategies or combination of strategies stimulate reform of STEM education ?
0233316TysonThis three-year award for US-France collaboration in materials research involves researchers and students at the New Jersey Institute of Technology and the Ecole National Superieure de Physique in Grenoble , France .
Trevor A. Tyson in the US and Catherine Dubourdieu in France lead the joint research effort on studies of structural and transport properties in ultra-thin films .
The investigators will explore the effect of high magnetic fields and high pressure on transport and local structure .
The principal investigator and a graduate student will travel to Grenoble to study French techniques for growing thins films .
During their visit to New Jersey , the French group will carry out high-pressure measurements ( using an optical system ) and high field local structure measurements .
This award represents the US side of parallel proposals to the NSF and the CNRS .
NSF will cover travel funds and living expenses for the US investigator and graduate student .
CNRS will support visits by French researchers and graduate students to the United States .
The research will advance understanding of the structural , electronic and magnetic properties of manganite materials .
This Water Cycle Research ( WCR ) project seeks to determine the flux of water between various reservoirs , in order to quantify the global water cycle .
The quantification is necessary for understanding the physical processes , characterization of hydroclimate variability and change , and for evaluation of climate models .
Dai and co-PI Trenberth ( both at NCAR ) will strive to quantify the precipitation amounts , intensity and frequency , and evaporation , from atmospheric water budgets and fresh water discharges from the continents ; global streamflow records from over 8000 stations will be analyzed .
The results should improve understanding of the fundamental components of the water cycle , especially , runoff , river discharge , net surface water fluxes , and oceanic freshwater transport .
The effort should lead to improved characterization of the interannual and decadal variabilities of the water fluxes , and of inter-basin transports .
The PIs expect their efforts to advance climate model development since the major model deficiencies are related to aspects of the water cycle .
The research should lead to improved modeling and prediction of hydroclimate variability and change , on both regional and continental scales .
This work is of potential benefit to the broad community of climate scientists studying water cycle science in the context of climate change and variability .
Moreover , the information from this research will improve climate models and their ability to project future climates , an important contribution to societal issues concerned with the environment .
CMS-0233543Philip Liu , Cornell U.International Travel Grant First International Symposium on Submarine Mass Movements and Their ConsequencesThis action is to support a US delegation to the First International Symposium on Submarine Mass Movements and Their Consequences .
This symposium will be held as part of the 2003 EGS-AGU- EUG joint meeting in Nice , France , from 7-11 April 2003 .
The objective of this symposium is to advance our knowledge of Potentially stable or unstable continental slopes - important to the health and safety of offshore and coastal regions ; The possible presence of gas hydrates and free gas zones - so as to improve environmental protection during offshore activities such as cable , pipeline laying and drilling operations ; Forces and release mechanisms of slope failures on margins , and of endangered areas - for a major contribution to sustainable development ; Establish , describe and develop tools for evaluating the consequences of submarine mass movements to the sea floor , man-made structures or coastal communities ; Links between the submarine mass movements and the generation of tsunamis .
Predictive tools and risk assessment of continental slope activity for the next 100 - 1000 years.A US delegation of six ( 6 ) researchers will participate in the symposium .
Every effort will be made to invite junior researchers of the U.S. tsunami community as the members of the delegation .
0233255KoplikThis three-year award for U.S.-France collaboration involves Joel Koplik of City College , City University of New York and Jean-Pierre Hulin of the University Marie and Pierre Curie in Paris , France .
The investigators propose to study several interrelated problems centered on the relationship between the fractal characteristics of the geometry of rough fractures and the transport properties of fluids within them .
The key geometrical feature of this work is the self-affine nature of fracture surfaces and the resulting correlations in the velocity field when fluid flows through such a fracture .
The U.S. investigator brings to this collaboration theoretical and numerical expertise .
This will be complemented by the experimental studies on reconstructed fractures conducted by the French group .
The joint program will entail laboratory experiments on transparent rough surfaces copied from natural rock samples with theoretical and computational studies in corresponding model fractally-rough geometries .
In addition , field experiments in a granite quarry will be conducted in collaboration with the French Institute for Physics of the Earth .
The project will advance understanding of the motions of fluids and particles in geological formations , with application to water supply , hydrocarbon production , and waste disposal .
The work is motivated by environmental concerns about groundwater contamination and safe disposal of nuclear waste in fractured rocks .
This award represents the U.S. side of a joint proposal to the NSF and the French National Center for Scientific Research ( CNRS ) .
NSF will cover travel funds and living expenses for the U.S. investigator , a postdoctoral researcher and/or graduate student .
The CNRS will support the visits of the French researchers to the United States .
EIA-0225656Reddy , RajCarnegie Mellon UniversityTitle Computational Learning and Discovery in Biological Sequence , Structure and Function MappingComputer scientists , together with biological chemists will collaborate using statistical and computational tools and methods that the computer scientists have been developing for dealing with human language to better understand the function of proteins .
Proteins are major players in the functioning of human and all other living cells .
As in languages , where sequences of letters determine patterns of words and sentences , sequences of amino acids in proteins determine protein structure , dynamics and function .
Such sequences and their constituents can be thought of as syllables or words that have particular properties .
Given these sequences , scientists want to be able to predict their geometrical structure and dynamics , and hence their function .
A deeper understanding of the relationship between these is required so that the information hidden in the DNA sequences of genes can be used to develop drugs to fight disease .
In particular , there is great societal demand to understand and treat degenerative diseases , many of which are based on defective triggers for protein shape and interactions .
Work toward these goals requires deep knowledge both in computer science and in biological chemistry , and must therefore be collaborative in nature .
Carnegie Mellon computer scientists will therefore be partnering with colleagues with expertise in Biological Chemistry at the University of Pittsburgh , the Massachusetts Institute of Technology ( MIT ) , Boston University and the National Research Council of Canada .
Industry collaborators include Mathworks , Inc. , and medical bioinformatics company , Medstory , Inc .
Using tools like statistical language modeling , machine learning methods and high-level language processing for understanding how proteins work inside cells is a relatively new field called computational biolinguistics .
At this point , the researchers have been able to detect protein fragment signatures from pathogens by application of statistical language modeling technologies to genome sequences , promising novel strategies in identifying and targeting such pathogens .
.
This award supports the travel and subsistence expenses of student participants in the First International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agents Systems ( AAMAS ) , being held July 15 - 19 , 2002 in Bologna , Italy .
This conference is entirely devoted to all aspects of research and application of agents technology , an important area of research in the success of the World Wide Web , electronic commerce , digital libraries , search agents , personal agents and synthetic agents .
Participation in this conference will allow a diverse group of students , representing a wide range of research areas and methodologies , to present their research to the agents ' community .
In addition , special mentoring activities are planned for them .
Illinois State University will shape the awareness , attitudes and knowledge of all freshman students and their parents by enhancing learning about gender issues in STEM before and during the freshman year .
The interventions will be conducted within three overlapping spheres -- the family context , the peer context , and the University 's curricular and co-curricular structures .
It is at the nexus of these three spheres that students make educational choices that affect their careers for decades.Within the family context , there will be a half-day or four-hour workshop that addresses gender equity in STEM , as part of the two-day Summer Orientation sessions for incoming 900 freshmen and their 1500 parents .
All the 150 undergraduate advisors at the University will also participate in the workshop.Within the peer context , learning communities will be formed to provide a support group that nurtures freshmen females who express interest ( or even mild enthusiasm ) in STEM .
The learning communities will be modeled on the existing Connections program at the University .
Each learning community will consist of a maximum of 30 students ( females and males ) , a science , mathematics , or technology professional on or off campus , who will serve as a role model , and a student leader ( university junior or senior in one of the STEM fields ) to help guide the students through their first year at the University.Within the context of the University 's curricular and co-curricular structures , a four-week topical excursion ( learning module ) will be part of an existing general education course , Foundations of Inquiry ( FOI ) , which all freshmen take during their first semester at the University .
In that topical excursion , the approach to Science/Technology/Society -- current issues in which the science , mathematics , engineering and technology play major roles -- will be combined with a more gender-related subtext -- choosing female scientists as authors , showing female scientists , engineers , and technologists at work , or raising the issue of gender bias in science research.The model exemplified in this project has the potential for replication at comparable institutions since many universities have some form of a summer orientation session for incoming freshmen and their parents , an introductory course that most freshmen take during their first year at the university , a structure for peer support , and undergraduate student advisement .
Gender-role attitudes of society are widely thought to deter college age women from STEM college courses , majors , and subsequent career paths .
Experiences during the transition to adulthood are particularly strong .
The goal is to challenge traditional concepts and definitions of femininity and its relationship with STEM disciplines taking a whole community approach at this critical stage in education -- getting male and female students , their parents , student advisors , and faculty involved .
0225585FlessaThe GEOscience Network ( GEON ) project seeks to bring leading-edge information management research to bear on creating a cyberinfrastructure for the solid earth geosciences to interlink multidisciplinary geoscience data sets in 4D space .
The need to manage the growing amounts of diverse Earth science data has been recognized through a series of NSF-sponsored community meetings on Geoinformatics .
The GEON collaboration between IT researchers , who represent key technology areas relevant to GEON , and Earth science researchers , who represent a broad cross section of Earth science sub-disciplines , will provide the foundation for a national Geoinformatics program.There is a pressing need in the Earth sciences for a national information infrastructure that enables the community to share databases and tools to enable interdisciplinary analysis of networked data sets in studying a wide range of phenomena including the interplay between tectonics and the evolution of sedimentary basins ; the role of mountain building in the evolution of climate and life ; broader predictive understanding and modeling capabilities of geologic hazards , such as earthquakes and volcanoes ; the 4D reconstruction of the Earth through time ; and , managing the natural resources of our planet .
Each of these problems requires interdisciplinary research to discover relationships among Earth science disciplines , and depends on the community 's ability to construct an integrated geoscience information system .
The goal of GEON is to develop the necessary IT foundations and create such a system.Many past and on-going projects in the geosciences have produced valuable sub-disciplinary and disciplinary databases .
Numerous national centers and organizations such as IRIS , UNAVCO , the National Center for Ecological Analysis and Synthesis ( NCEAS ) , the Southern California Earthquake Center ( SCEC ) , as well as government agencies such as the U.S. Geological Survey ( USGS ) , are contributing research and data to the community .
Building on this base , the imperative now is to take a step beyond research resulting in disciplinary databases , towards a new paradigm for interdisciplinary information integration and tool sharing via the creation of the GEON cyberinfrastructure .
The research products and services arising from GEON will be available to the entire scientific community and will transform the way in which geoscience research is conducted , opening unprecedented avenues for research and collaboration and providing the foundation for creating geoscience collaboratories .
*** Ecomorphology is the study of how an organism 's anatomy is associated with its ecology .
Behavior , or how animals use their anatomy , is an important bridge between animals and their environments .
Specifically , comparing animals abilities to perform certain tasks can provide information about the ecological roles those animals play .
Modern ecomorphology studies combine analyses of anatomy , performance and relationships among animals to understand the factors underlying the diversity of organisms in the world today .
Scientists studying birds and fish have found a strong association between the anatomy of the skull and feeding behavior .
This study investigates whether this same strong association is typical of mammals .
By investigating this relationship , this study will test fundamental associations between skull form and skull function and shed light on the basis of ecological diversity within one group of modern mammals .
The subjects of this study are two distantly related groups of fruit bats - New World fruit bats and Old World fruit bats .
These groups were selected for this study because they each contain an array of species that divide the fruit resources available to them in similar ways .
The anatomical and behavioral diversity within these two groups make them an ideal test case for studying the interplay between skull morphology , behavioral flexibility and feeding performance .
The goal of this study is to explore the relationships among cranial morphology , feeding performance , and diet , and evaluate the roles that these factors play in the ecological diversity of fruit feeding mammals .
This study will 1 ) provide an assessment of flexibility in feeding behavior within and between species , 2 ) identify peaks in feeding performance within species , 3 ) test fundamental associations between skull morphology and dietary habits ; 4 ) evaluate the role of body size in feeding performance , and 5 ) test the hypothesis that skull morphology and feeding behavior are tightly linked and reflect variation in diet more than evolutionary history .
Each of these five areas will be explored through testing explicit hypotheses using specific statistical and systematic techniques .
The importance of this study lies in testing the proposition that skull morphology and feeding behavior are tightly linked in mammals .
Although mammals are generally well studied , the relationship between variation in feeding performance and ecological diversity has not been investigated .
This study will assess the correlation of morphology , behavior , and performance in two ecologically similar but distantly related linages - a design that provides a natural test of the strength of association among these factors .
We shall organize a Conference Board of the Mathematical Sciences conference on `Expansion Methods in Combinatorics ' to take place in Memphis in May 2003 .
The principal lecturer will be Christian Borgs of Microsoft Research and the conference will be aimed at young researchers as well as established researchers in combinatorics , computer science and other areas related to statistical physics and probability theory.Although several methods from statistical physics have already found applications in combinatorics and theoretical computer science , one of the classical methods of statistical mechanics , cluster expansion , hashardly been employed in these fields .
There is every reason to believe that in the right hands these expansion techniques will find important and far-reaching applications in combinatorics and theoretical computer science .
For this reason , the conference will address these important techniques with the twin aims of raising awareness of them and working towards their simplification .
This small grant for exploratory research will support development of novel computer systems that will enhance the quality of life of people suffering from Alzheimer 's Disease and similar cognitive disorders .
Assisted Cognition systems use ubiquitous computing and artificial intelligence technology to replace some of the memory and problem-solving abilities that have been lost by an Alzheimer 's patient .
Assisted Cognition systems sense aspects of an individual 's location and environment , both outdoors and at home , relying on a wide range of sensors such as Global Positioning Systems ( GPS ) , active badges , motion detectors , and other ubiquitous computing infrastructure ; learn to interpret patterns of everyday behavior , and recognize signs of distress , disorientation , or confusion , using techniques from state estimation , plan recognition , and machine learning ; offer help to patients through various kinds of interventions including speech and natural language processing ; and alert human care-givers in case of danger.Two concrete examples of the Assisted Cognition systems that will be developed are an activity compass that helps reduce spatial disorientation both inside and outside the home , and an adaptive prompter that helps patients carry out multi-step everyday tasks .
This project will explore an emerging area that could be of great humanitarian , commercial , social , and scientific importance in the coming decades .
Recent advances in nanometer scale science and technology offer novel approaches for the development of ultra-miniature low-power sensor nodes for distributed wireless sensor networks in applications such as environmental monitoring , civil infrastructure monitoring , condition-based maintenance , security and surveillance .
The reduced dimensions and masses of nanoelectromechanical systems ( NEMS ) are of great interest for highly-sensitive force- and mass-sensing .
We propose a novel technology based on assembly of nanostructured nanomechanical sensors rather than their direct machining from the substrate material .
Nanomechanical sensing structures will be produced using bottom-up synthesis , then surface assembled and integrated with foundry-fabricated monolithic circuits through electrofluidic assembly , allowing on-chip integration of nanomechanical sensors with transduction , readout , processing , and communications circuitry .
This approach also offers flexibility and scalability , enabling the assembly of a larger range of functional structures .
Leveraging our core competencies in NEMS device development and analog/RF/microwave IC design , we will develop a micropower nanosensor-based microsystem containing nanosensor assembly/integration sites , sensor-specific transduction , and read-out electronics.These research activities are complemented with related education/outreach goals .
These include the groundwork for Summer Microelectronics Workshops that will provide cleanroom research experiences to local high-school teachers .
This pilot program offers the promise for substantial impact in K-12 science and mathematics education .
The combination of these pedagogical and research activities will enable a complete academic program that bridges the gap between bottom-up nanotechnology and microsystems .
More specifically , the proposed integration of electrofluidic assembly of nanosensors with prefabricated functional circuits represents realistic possibilities for the development of Integrative Nanosystems that can sense , think , or communicate .
Recent advances in nanometer scale science and technology offer novel approaches for the development of ultra-miniature low-power sensor nodes for distributed wireless sensor networks in applications such as environmental monitoring , civil infrastructure monitoring , condition-based maintenance , security and surveillance .
The reduced dimensions and masses of nanoelectromechanical systems ( NEMS ) are of great interest for highly-sensitive force- and mass-sensing .
We propose a novel technology based on assembly of nanostructured nanomechanical sensors rather than their direct machining from the substrate material .
Nanomechanical sensing structures will be produced using bottom-up synthesis , then surface assembled and integrated with foundry-fabricated monolithic circuits through electrofluidic assembly , allowing on-chip integration of nanomechanical sensors with transduction , readout , processing , and communications circuitry .
This approach also offers flexibility and scalability , enabling the assembly of a larger range of functional structures .
Leveraging our core competencies in NEMS device development and analog/RF/microwave IC design , we will develop a micropower nanosensor-based microsystem containing nanosensor assembly/integration sites , sensor-specific transduction , and read-out electronics.These research activities are complemented with related education/outreach goals .
These include the groundwork for Summer Microelectronics Workshops that will provide cleanroom research experiences to local high-school teachers .
This pilot program offers the promise for substantial impact in K-12 science and mathematics education .
The combination of these pedagogical and research activities will enable a complete academic program that bridges the gap between bottom-up nanotechnology and microsystems .
More specifically , the proposed integration of electrofluidic assembly of nanosensors with prefabricated functional circuits represents realistic possibilities for the development of Integrative Nanosystems that can sense , think , or communicate .
Wireless communication is essential for coordination of emergencyresponse efforts .
However , the various kinds of unit ( fire , police , FBI and unattended sensors ) do not necessarily have access to commonradio architectures .
To achieve high levels of flexibility andscalability for wireless communication , the processing of the wirelesswaveforms must be performed in software i.e. , softwareradio .
Migrating algorithms from hardware to software can increasethe level of functionality but only if the communication protocols areestablished at run time .
We propose an approach to establishingcommunication by explicitly maintaining self-awareness andcommunication of knowledge about the operation of the communicationnodes .
The self-awareness and communication of knowledge is based onthe maintenance of an explicit , declarative knowledge base orontology of communication .
Hence , we refer to the concept asOntology Based Radio ( OBR ) .
An ontology captures the basicterminology ( concepts ) of the domain of interest and the relationshipsamong the concepts .
Ontologies can be expressed in the DARPA AgentMarkup Language ( DAML ) , and processed either off-line using a theoremprover or in real time using an expert system engine .
The main ideaof OBR is that the communication nodes `` understand '' the contents ofinformation to be transferred , their own capabilities and capabilitiesof the destination units .
The goal of the proposed project is todevelop a proof of concept that demonstrates optimized dynamicinteroperability between different kinds of communication node , especially unattended sensors as well as radios used by emergencyresponse teams .
EIA-0225656Reddy , RajCarnegie Mellon UniversityTitle Computational Learning and Discovery in Biological Sequence , Structure and Function MappingComputer scientists , together with biological chemists will collaborate using statistical and computational tools and methods that the computer scientists have been developing for dealing with human language to better understand the function of proteins .
Proteins are major players in the functioning of human and all other living cells .
As in languages , where sequences of letters determine patterns of words and sentences , sequences of amino acids in proteins determine protein structure , dynamics and function .
Such sequences and their constituents can be thought of as syllables or words that have particular properties .
Given these sequences , scientists want to be able to predict their geometrical structure and dynamics , and hence their function .
A deeper understanding of the relationship between these is required so that the information hidden in the DNA sequences of genes can be used to develop drugs to fight disease .
In particular , there is great societal demand to understand and treat degenerative diseases , many of which are based on defective triggers for protein shape and interactions .
Work toward these goals requires deep knowledge both in computer science and in biological chemistry , and must therefore be collaborative in nature .
Carnegie Mellon computer scientists will therefore be partnering with colleagues with expertise in Biological Chemistry at the University of Pittsburgh , the Massachusetts Institute of Technology ( MIT ) , Boston University and the National Research Council of Canada .
Industry collaborators include Mathworks , Inc. , and medical bioinformatics company , Medstory , Inc .
Using tools like statistical language modeling , machine learning methods and high-level language processing for understanding how proteins work inside cells is a relatively new field called computational biolinguistics .
At this point , the researchers have been able to detect protein fragment signatures from pathogens by application of statistical language modeling technologies to genome sequences , promising novel strategies in identifying and targeting such pathogens .
.
Kansas State University is developing an interactive CD-ROM/DVD set for use with pre-service and in-service high school teachers , teacher education faculty and college faculty in SMET fields .
The set will ( 1 ) introduce the user to the research base on gender and gender socialization , ( 2 ) sensitize these educators to the inadvertent gender bias that operates in SMET classrooms and programs , ( 3 ) provide classroom strategies and interventions designed to reduce bias , and ( 4 ) present school-wide or department-wide efforts to increase the presence of women in SMET classes and programs.Components of the CD-ROM/DVD include ( 1 ) classroom segments or dramatizations of bias , research , or interventions ; ( 2 ) interviews with female high school and college students about their experiences in SMET classrooms ; ( 3 ) interviews with high school teachers and college faculty members about the process by which they became sensitized to gender issues and began working towards change ; ( 4 ) interviews with researchers familiar with the research on gender bias conducted in both psychology and education ; ( 5 ) abstracts of relevant journal articles ; and ( 6 ) essays that invite further reflection.The CD-ROM/DVD will be field-tested with the target population and disseminated through existing professional organizations .
In addition , guidelines will be prepared for introduction of the CD-ROM/DVD in classroom settings for pre-service teachers as well as in professional development seminars for in-service teachers and college faculty.The project is innovative in its use of an interactive CD-ROM/DVD to provide instruction , in its integration of presentations of gender bias in education with a solid research base , and in its use of student and teacher/college faculty members ' voices to explore their own experiences in SMET classrooms and the processes by which change is implemented .
Because it can be used both individually and as part of a classroom or seminar , the CD-ROM/DVD has the capacity to reach thousands of pre-service and in-service teachers , teacher educators , and college faculty who work in SMET disciplines .
This potential for reaching a broad audience makes this project a cost-effective and efficient method of strengthening the social infrastructure in SMET education in ways that ultimately increase the number of women working in SMET fields .
This project proposes to continue the efforts of the Student Meeting Activities Subcommittee of the Power Engineering Education Committee ( PEEC ) of the IEEE Power Engineering Society ( PES ) to promote student interest and participation in the power engineering field by sponsoring 90-100 electrical engineering students to attend the IEEE-PES annual Summer Meeting to be held in Chicago , Illinois July 21-25 , 2002 .
The goal of this project is to provide an opportunity for students to be exposed to the most recent developments in design , operation , construction , and research in the power engineering field , to share ideas amongst themselves , and to interact with practicing engineers .
This is a particularly critical time for power engineering as the industry undergoes significant change due to the restructuring of the traditional utility structure .
It is crucial to recruit the nation 's best and brightest engineering students into this evolving field .
The career opportunities for students interested in power engineering are many and varied ; opportunities exist within utilities , vendors , manufacturers , and consulting firms .
Under the direction of Dr. Brian Billman , Ms. Celeste Gagnon will collect data for her doctoral dissertation .
She will conduct an analysis of skeletal remains of approximately 900 individuals recovered from the site of Cerro Oreja , located on the north coast of Peru .
Isotopic determinations will also be made .
Cerro Oreja documents the development of the Moche state and provides insight into the emergence of a society which incorporated large numbers of people under centralized control .
This process took place independently in many parts of the world and thus forms an important topic for anthropological research .
Ms. Gagnon wishes to understand the effect of political centralization on individual health and nutrition and hypothesizes that positive benefits result .
Because the occupation of Cerro Oreja spans almost 2000 years - from 1500 BC to AD 400 it will be possible to correlate social and biological change .
Bioarchaeological data to be collected include frequencies of dental caries , periodontal disease , dental abscesses and antemortum tooth loss .
In addition , measures of stable isotopes , rates and types of dental wear and identifications of microplant remains from dental calculus will be analyzed .
The bioarchaeological data will also address issues of class , gender and age and the effects these had on access to specific foods .
This research is important because it will provide insight into the relationship between social and biological change and assist in training a promising young scientist .
ABSTRACTProposal 0073259PI Gyungho LeeTitle High-Bandwidth Memory Pipeline for Wide-Issue Processors Technological and architectural innovations have enabled development of powerful microprocessors that can issue several instructions concurrently at a very high clock rate .
In future processors with aggressive speculation techniques , an even larger number of instruction issues per cycle are expected .
Efficient handling of memory references for data access is one of the keys to achieving high performance in future processors .
This research addresses methods to provide sufficient bandwidth at fast latency for data access in wide-issue processors issuing tens of instructions per cycle .
The methods are based on the concept of data decoupling .
Data decoupling divides the memory reference instructions into multiple independent streams before the actual addresses of the data they access are known .
Partitioned memory reference instructions are then fed into a separate memory pipeline .
This research investigates the issues in effective and efficient hardware and software support for multiple memory pipelines based on data decoupling .
The data decoupling approach of providing multiple memory pipelines can provide two crucial advantages over a conventional design .
First , the cost and the complexity of building a large cache with many ports are reduced .
Second , partitioning memory references can facilitate more specialized handling of each partitioned stream .
The University of Massachusetts at Amherst and the University of Pittsburgh are jointly planning to establish an NSF Industry/University Cooperative Research Center ( I/UCRC ) for e-Design and Realization of Engineered Products and Systems .
The Center 's mission is to serve as a center of excellence in IT enabled design and realization of discrete manufactured products by envisioning where information is the lifeblood of an enterprise and collaboration is the hallmark that seamlessly integrates design , development , testing , manufacturing and servicing of products around the world.The proposed Center , a fusion of expertise and resources from the already successful Center for e-Product Design & Realization at the University of Pittsburgh and the Center for Manufacturing Productivity at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst , is a joint effort to achieve synergy in the development of the enabling technologies to support the new project development paradigm .
The proposed I/UCRC would leverage the existing talent faculty from complementary engineering disciplines , infrastructure and experience of each university .
It has been discovered that a cold gas flow parallel to the anode surface can lead to a stable attachment with an enlarged non-equilibrium region between the luminous arc plasma and the anode surface .
The current flow to the anode appears to be distributed over a relatively large area , thus drastically reducing the anode heat flux .
In this study , this type of arc attachment , in which a constrictor-stabilized arc attaches to an anode perpendicular to the arc axis with a cold gas flow parallel to the anode surface , is investigated .
The enlarged non-equilibrium region between the anode and the arc column is characterized with a newly developed data analysis technique using Thomson scattering of laser radiation to determine the electron temperature and density distributions .
Measurements with a Langmuir probe imbedded in the anode provide values for the same quantities at the anode surface allowing determination of the current density distribution , and heat-flux probe measurements give the heat-flux distribution at the anode surface .
A parallel modeling effort using a three-dimensional finite-volume code for a non-equilibrium plasma provides insight into the physical processes in this non-equilibrium region including a mapping of the electric field strength .
Both kinetic and composition non-equilibrium are considered , and a self-consistent treatment for diffusion is used.Broader impactHigh intensity arcs have attracted considerable interest for materials processing because they can provide high fluxes of electrons , ions , or other radicals .
However , because the arc plasma is usually close to equilibrium , these fluxes are usually coupled with high heat fluxes , limiting their usefulness for processing applications .
Furthermore , electric arcs frequently operate in an unstable manner , and the high heat fluxes lead to erosion of the electrodes , limiting the life of arcing devices .
This study addresses the problems of the high heat fluxes associated with the benefits of high electron densities in electric arcs .
Two aspects of this investigation are expected to lead to results of practical importance .
One is the generation of larger non-equilibrium plasma volumes that can be used for surface treatment or bulk chemical processing .
The second is the existence of a wide-area diffuse attachment for high-intensity arcs with apparently low heat-flux densities and , consequentl This project evaluates the extent to which ad hoc networks of embedded systems ( NESTs ) may be used to implement feedback control systems .
Ad hoc NESTs are inexpensive and easy to deploy , but their ad hoc nature makes it impossible to realize feedback controllers in hard real-time .
NEST feedback control systems , therefore , are soft real-time systems in which feedback measurements are delayed or dropped .
Maintaining specified levels of overall closed loop performance in such a soft real-time environment is extremely challenging .
This project will develop methods for assuring overall closed loop performance in NEST systems .
This goal will be achieved by adopting a cross-disciplinary approach that integratesresearch efforts in control , real-time systems , computer systems , and communications .
In particular , the project tackles this problem by 1 ) the dynamic re-routing of connections using a polynomial extension of minimum hop routing schemes , 2 ) the development of novel soft scheduling methods whose behavior can be directly related to closed loop controller performance , and 3 ) the dynamic re-allocation of link capacities through the use of combined channel coding and ARQ methods.The project 's broader impacts will be expressed through an undergraduate level course that integrates control theory concepts with embedded system principles .
Futher project impacts will be realized by coordinating this work with an existing DARPA contract that is developing middleware technologies for NEST-type systems .
Two years of support are being requested if at all possible .
The reason for this is because it is necessary to complete several key steps before submission as a regular proposal .
The first summer is to prepare papers for presentation and/or appearance in conferences and/or journals .
During the ensuing academic year , the intellectual content of this potentially controversial material will be circulated for comment , both publicly in talks and privately among colleagues .
Based on the feedback received , the ideas put forth will be modified and corrected .
Only then does it make sense to use the following summer to involve an undergraduate student in implementing the salient features of the proposed work for both a greater depth of understanding and demonstration purposes .
By this point in time , that would mean there should be preliminary results appearing in print , with supporting documentation on the web explaining this material .
In addition , more capable assistive computing technology will be available by then ( to help me overcome my hand disability ) , so that I might be able to more actively participate in the implementation details of that work .
When all of this is readily in place , then it will be possible to submit a competitive regular proposal .
The existence of volumetric imagery is a natural consequence of distributed imaging and is a significant potential benefit of the sensor-network paradigm .
Volumetric image data is important for many commercial , scientific , and military applications .
Security-related imaging applications in both the military and commercial sectors are now receiving heightened attention , and volumetric imagery is expected to play an ever-increasing role within these important application domains .
This proposal is concerned with novel methods for compressing volumetric imagery .
We will focus primarily on volumetric data that has been generated by range sensors ( e.g. , ladar ) and arrays of range sensors ; however , many of the approaches will be extensible to more traditional imaging sensors and sensor arrays .
The goal of the proposed work will be the efficient compression of volumetric image data an issue that is expected to be especially critical for wireless and/or mobile sensor applications , in which power constraints become severe .
The project will assume a distributed sensing environment and will focus on balancing inter-sensor against downlink communication costs .
When inter-sensor communication is not allowed each sensor must rely on its own measurements along with prior knowledge of the sensor constellation to predict which aspects of its measurements are unique and thus warrant transmission .
We will pursue techniques for both prediction and compression of this unique sensor data .
When limited inter-sensor communication is allowed , it is important to identify maximally informative data to exchange so as to optimize both inter-sensor and downlink efficiency .
AST-0225645PI Szalay , AlexanderInst Johns Hopkins University Dr. Szalay is awarded funds at Johns Hopkins University to continue expanding , advertising , and evaluating its pilot website , Skyserver ( http//skyserver.sdss.org ) .
This site makes data from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey ( SDSS ) freely available to anyone with Internet access .
By the time the SDSS is finished in 2005 , it will have mapped one-quarter of the entire sky in detail , determining the positions and absolute brightnesses of more than 100 million celestial objects .
It will also take spectra of more than a million galaxies and quasars .
Dr. Szalay has built a team of astronomers , programmers , science writers , education experts , and teachers in order to reach a wide audience .
They have designed several tools to allow students and the general public to easily and intuitively access SDSS data .
They are also designing several interactive educational projects in which students use SDSS data to learn concepts from astronomy .
For example , students will make Hubble diagrams to show the expansion of the universe , calculate temperatures of stars from spectra , and look for asteroids in SDSS images .
All projects will include teachers guides that give complete solutions , advice on teaching the projects to a class , and applicability to national education standards .
*** Our objective is simple and straightforward - use novel porous SiC materials to develop an all- solid state fuel cell that it 'll more than double the output power of Si based fuel cells while completely eliminating the problem of CO poisoning of expensive Pt electrodes !
Currently available proton exchange membrane fuel cells ( PEMFC5 ) suffer from three major limitations connected to cell design and materials used .
First , most PEFC designs require elaborate manifold design and hydrodynamic control schemes which include humidification modules and rotating components such as pumps and compressors .
The second major limitation comes from the Pt anode electro catalysts , which are extremely CO intolerant down to the 5 to 10 ppm level .
Thirdly , poor thermal dissipation from the exothermic process limits membrane lifetimes and power density output .
Our objective is to make use of rapid advances in novel SiC nanoporous materials to completely eliminate the need for platinum and low-temperature polymer membranes .
Preliminary results from catalytic reactor studies show that SiC has a high degree of catalytic activity and .
due to its wide band gap , high output fuel cells operating at higher thermal budget efficiencies will be possible .
The objective of this work is to demonstrate such a fuel cell that will revolutionize the portable power storage industry .
Advantages/advances over conventional PE FC s are summarized belowo Completely passive operation designed run on dry , low pressure , solid-source hydrogen and atmospheric pressure air without the need for humidification modules .
Elimination of compressed gaseous hydrogen fuel and negative public perception ( e.g.. hydrogen bomb , Hindenburg , etc .
) .o Elimination of hydrodynamic auxiliaries such as pumps , compressors , fans or blowers resulting in completely quiet operation .
Increased power , efficiency and reliability by eliminating the parasitic power required to run auxiliaries and absence of moving mechanical parts.o Elimination of the costly Pt electrode and CO poisoning problems.o Solid-state microfabrication , thin-film deposition , and micromachining approachesprovide a manufacturable modular , self-contained unit.o Greatly improved fuel cell stack size and weight , fuel storage and delivery , packaging , robustness and thermal management due to microfabrication and material properties ofSIC.o Significantly improved thermal budget efficiencies due to the high thermalconductivity of SiC , which is higher than that of copper at room-temperature , 430 verses 540 W/mK respectively.Rapid development of this technology is critical .
Therefore a seed grant to get these novel ideas from the concept stage to the demonstration stage is needed .
Traditional proposals to expand this research at the University of South Florida are planned .
However the graduate students who are already working on this project were being funded on a grant that has just ended .
Therefore immediate funding is required to cover this research if progress is to continue .
Improving education and inclusion of students with disabilities in science , mathematics , engineering , and technology ( SMET ) through camps , science fairs and other programs are imperative to the diversification of our future SMET work force .
Students with disabilities in remote and rural regions are much less likely to have access to SMET resources because of their geographic location .
Additionally , students with disabilities and their families are often strapped financially due to excessive costs in transportation , adaptive technologies , support personnel , personal care , and architectural adaptations .
After families pay for these essentials , SMET camps and programs often are a financial burden .
As one step in our project , we plan to collaborate with existing SMET camps and programs , to demonstrate that all camps can be appropriate for students with disabilities .
This would enable students in rural and remote regions such as Alaska to participate fully in science and math education experiences leading to careers in SMET .
The Shaping Vocational Frontiers Project will be directed by Drs .
Radtke and Owens with assistance from Access Alaska .
Dr. Radtke is a well known scientist and community activist and Dr. Owens is an experienced researcher and teacher , outdoor educator and inventor .
Both men have severe disabilities and are intimately familiar with the problems faced by persons with disabilities in SMET related activities .
Access Alaska will be instrumental in training , camp accessibility , and network development .
The project will create a program that involves a core of students , families , scientists , educators , and university-level science teacher trainers .
This amalgam will strive to enhance the opportunities for acquiring SMET education for students with disabilities throughout Alaska .
As a group we will work towards this goal through changes in science education curriculum , educational practices , and policy in the state .
We plan to identify students with disabilities across the state who can benefit from this program and provide them with hands-on , field-based science .
We will emphasize activities that provide for integration of students with disabilities with their traditional counterparts who do not have disabilities .
Role models and mentors , many with disabilities themselves , will advise , problem solve , and guide both individual students and heterogeneous teams of students ( consisting of both able-bodied and students with disabilities ) in these activities .
The appropriate assistive technology will be used in concert with Internet to insure that students with disabilities will be fully included in SMET activities , Electronic technology ( including the Internet ) will be used to encourage networking and information dissemination among student teams , educational organizations , administrators , and members of the community .
The project will be carefully documented for public television and Internet venues .
All publications produced by the project will be available through fully accessible electronic media .
This award will support approximately 16 graduate students to attend the ACM SIGMOBILE International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking ( MobiCom 2002 ) to be held in Atlanta , Georgia in September 23-26 , 2002 .
This is a premier networking conference on mobility and data management and services in wireless environments .
This project focuses on the changing economic geographies of apparel production in Central and Eastern Europe ( CEE ) .
After an initial period of rapid industrial collapse and only limited persistence of apparel firms , there has been a more recent 'rebirth ' of production throughout the region , linked primarily to changes in the international structure of the industry and in European Union legislation and markets .
The project investigates four aspects of these changes .
First , using international trade , production , and employment data , the project documents the emergence of these complex new geographies of apparel production and trade , and assess the specific roles played by changes in the international structure of the industry and by changes in international trade regulations .
Second , through interviews with brand-name manufacturers , retailers , marketers , and national buying firms in Western Europe , the U.S. , and CEE , the study analyzes the important role of buyer-driven commodity chains in sourcing and controlling suppliers in CEE under conditions of intensely competitive pricing and rapidly changing demand .
Third , through detailed case studies in six regions in Slovakia and Bulgaria , the project examines the ways in which international sourcing restructures existing national industries , impacts upon the creation of new firms , and produces a variety of industrial forms and practices .
Fourth , in seeking to explain this diversity of apparel production , the project examines the ways in which existing social , institutional , and community conditions in different regions of each country are shaping the enterprises and regional economies that are emerging .
The pace of new firm creation in these regions is astonishing and the regional impacts of these firms and the scope of their integration with European markets surprising .
Through this research we hope to contribute to our understanding of the specific forms and practices of what has been more generally characterized as low-wage , assembly production for export .
In particular , we hope to contribute to the literatures in economic geography , globalization debates , and post-socialist restructuring about the roles of national suppliers and markets in the operation of the new firms , the extent to which uniform or differentiated production and marketing strategies are emerging , and the impacts local conditions have on the operation of primarily international contract and assembly production .
The proposed research will enable us to examine more fully the conditions and contradictions associated with international integration and local economic reconfiguration in post-socialist Europe .
The project will enable us to move beyond single-region and single-country case studies by providing a cross-national and cross-regional analysis of local economic transformations in apparel producing areas .
Finally , the research will contribute to our understanding of the role of other economic and social practices in shaping the internationalization of the post-socialist apparel industry and its producing regions .
The change in biology to a data driven science has meant that new educational needs have become apparent .
Primary among these is the skills associated with biological informatics , skills in understanding algorithms and databases .
This workshop will draw together a group of scientist with a background and experience in developing curricula in bioinformatics to identify best practices and the challenges that remain .
The programs represented at the meeting cover the US and , by holding it in association with a major meeting , will help to raise awareness of the importance of education and training in biological informatics .
A report of the meeting will be made available on the web .
0225007FongThis proposal was received in response to the Spin Electronics for the 21st century Initiative , Program Solicitation NSF 02-036 .
The proposal focuses on the computational design of novel quantum structures in the forms of heterojunctions , quantum wells , and quantum dots composed of half-metallic compounds in zinc-blende structure with both magnetically and nonmagnetically doped semiconductors as new materials for spintronics .
The unique features possessed by these half-metals compounds are ( A ) the half metallic properties of each compound are preserved for a range of each lattice constant , ( B ) large magnetic moments ( = 1 uB ) , ( C ) high Curie temperature ( = 400oK ) , and ( D ) less intrinsic scattering ( greater coherence ) than for dilute magnetically doped semiconductors due to the fact that the half metals are stoichiometric compounds .
They inspire a singular opportunity for making novel quantum structures .
The outcome of this proposal will include ( 1 ) the technological information of quantum structures for spintronic applications , ( 2 ) specific scientific knowledge about the effects of interfaces , surfaces on the magnetic and electronic properties of the proposed quantum structures , and ( 3 ) the selections of elements serving as antisurfactants to grow half-metallic quantum dots .
Specifically relevant to ( 1 ) , The PIs will provide ( a ) the compositions of quantum structures involving chromium and manganese compounds with magnetic and nonmagnetic doped semiconductors and exhibiting half-metallic behaviors as new spintronic materials , ( b ) the magnetic and electronic properties of the promising quantum structures , ( c ) the possibility of making spin polarized Schottky barriers , and ( d ) the conditions for ballistic spin transport in heterojunctions , and quantum wells .
For ( 2 ) , the information will lead them to understand ( i ) Whether spin polarized Schottky barriers are being formed in heterojunctions and quantum wells made of half metal compounds with various doped semiconductors , and do the interfaces affect the corresponding half-metallic character and magnetic moment ?
( ii ) What are the effects of the Schottky barrier formed by the metallic spin channel of a heterojunction on its semiconducting spin channel ?
( iii ) Do subbands formed in a quantum well exhibit the stepwise feature in the conductance ?
( iv ) How do the magnetic properties of a quantum dot made of a half-metal compound depend on the sizes of the dots , and on cation- versus anion-terminated surface ?
Finally , the results relevant to ( 3 ) will provide guidelines for facilitating the growth of quantum dots composed of half-metals with the zinc-blende structure .
The University of Massachusetts at Amherst and the University of Pittsburgh are jointly planning to establish an NSF Industry/University Cooperative Research Center ( I/UCRC ) for e-Design and Realization of Engineered Products and Systems .
The Center 's mission is to serve as a center of excellence in IT enabled design and realization of discrete manufactured products by envisioning where information is the lifeblood of an enterprise and collaboration is the hallmark that seamlessly integrates design , development , testing , manufacturing and servicing of products around the world.The proposed Center , a fusion of expertise and resources from the already successful Center for e-Product Design & Realization at the University of Pittsburgh and the Center for Manufacturing Productivity at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst , is a joint effort to achieve synergy in the development of the enabling technologies to support the new project development paradigm .
The proposed I/UCRC would leverage the existing talent faculty from complementary engineering disciplines , infrastructure and experience of each university .
Objective-Oriented Mobile Heterogeneous Sensor Networks forCoordinated ControlThis proposal focuses on a comprehensive study of large , mobile ad hocreconfigurable networks for coordinated control , using coordinatedautonomous flight as a guiding example problem .
State estimationprovides a link between control and communications which admitsheterogeneous sensors , that is the combining of dissimilar ordifferent accuracy data using concepts which underpin datafusion .
Management of complexity and preservation of design principlesare keys to the development of workable , tunable , mission-orientedsystems with many components.The intellectual merit of this collaborative research proposal hingeson the drawing together of cognate and disparate elements fromcoordinated control , dynamic state estimation , ad hoc networkmanagement , resource assignment , and fault tolerance .
Its aim is toprovide a formalism in which the methods of sensor networking may beintegrated as part of a systematic design process focused on achievinga specific control objective .
This provides a framework for thedevelopment of methodologies for embedding a sensor network in acontext of control performance.The broader impact of this research is that it ties together tools andtechniques from distinct areas using concepts of informationquality .
The team is multi-disciplinary across a gamut of SystemsEngineering and the problem area impacts a range of fundamentalproblems in the individual areas of specialization .
This linkageacross communications , control , networking and estimation is aperceived bottleneck of current design techniques .
DMI-9734147 Endres The research focus of this CAREER project is integrated analysis of the machine tool , tooling , and machining process in support of a systems-approach to the development , planning and diagnosis of machining systems .
This requires a comprehensive analysis tool that merges detailed cutting mechanics and analytical machining dynamics , which represents a shift in paradigm from looking at the two as virtually separate problems .
A 3-D mechanistic edge ploughing model will be formulated such that it adheres to slip-line theory .
The ploughing model will be complemented by a model of the cut-chip deformation energy that is present when using curved cutting edges seen in industrially relevant processes .
The result is the replacement of process-specific physical calibration experiments with predicted process-specific calibration pseudo-based solely on tube-end turning physical test data .
It will then be merged with an analytical solution for chatter level , derived first for a linear process and then extended to account for process nonlinearity .
Educational activities will include the redevelopment of a mechanical design course into a project-based experience including design , analysis and hands-on manufacture of components and simple systems , as well as the development of a graduate course on dynamics and mechanics of machining as a repository for the latest research in machining dynamics and fundamental process mechanics .
The development of analytical dynamics solutions for performance and risk assessment increases the pool of analysis tools and allows industrial users to reduce calibration testing .
The resulting advances in the science base will make possible economic implementation of emerging machining practices ( high-speed , single-pass and hard machining ) .
0225024PattenThis award supports an eighteen month Japan Society for the Promotion of Science ( JSPS ) Short-Term Postdoctoral Fellowship for John A. Patten at the University of North Carolina in Charlotte .
He will be collaborating with Professor Wei Gao at Tohoku University in Japan .
They will be undertaking research on the machining of ceramics .
This will involve working on three different silicon nitride ceramics .
They are a reaction bonded silicon nitride from Ceradyne , a hot isostatic press ( HIP ) material from Japan and a commercial HIP material from Allied Signal .
All three materials behave similarly when machined , in that they have a ductile to brittle transition ( with increasing depth of cut or increasing feed ) yet all behave differently in terms of their machining characteristics .
They will be studying the forces , tool wear , cutting edge radius measurements , finished surface roughness and then evaluating the material removed ( chips ) and the finished surface for signs of phase transformations using TEM and Raman Spectroscopy.The researchers hope to determine the behavior differences for these three materials and then develop methods to exploit their differences .
Ductile machining of ceramics is advantageous in that very smooth , crack free surfaces can be generated .
Such surfaces are useful for many structural and also microelectronic applications .
This project will offer a good opportunity to join efforts between the two countries .
Through the exchange of ideas and technology , this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and cooperation .
The researchers plan to publish results of the research on the web and report on the findings at scientific meetings .
Water covers approximately 70 % of the earth surface .
However , this majority of the planet is under-explored and poorly understood .
This is largely a result of the significant challenge posed by the underwater environment , with its high pressure , unpredictable currents , nearly freezing temperatures , attenuation of electromagnetic waves and light , and harsh chemical compositions .
A variety of scientific , military and industrial tasks call for tools that function in the ocean environment .
Autonomous Underwater Vehicles ( AUVs ) are important platforms for carrying out sophisticated underwater tasks .
Currently some tasks are not suitable for AUVs due to technical limitations .
More advanced applications demand small , integrated , power efficient and potentially networked AUVs to increase the effectiveness and reduce the costs .
A key step in moving toward this vision is improved sensors for AUVs .
This project aims to develop integrated underwater sensors inspired by the fish lateral line system .
Prototypes of sensors will be built and used to investigate the fluid mechanical behavior of such sensors through computational and experimental means .
The potential applications include the detection of hydrodynamic wakes , tracing of chemical plumes , and determination of hydrodynamic properties at the interface of fluid and structures .
The proposed effort will focus on one problem - that of detection of hydrodynamic wakes.Planned research activities consists of three integral components ( 1 ) The development and improvement of biomimetic integrated microsensors ; ( 2 ) The validation and prediction of sensor performance using full scale direct numerical simulation and reduced-model simulation ; ( 3 ) The experimental validation of sensor performance and computational results .
This proposal will fund a one-day workshop that will present NSF-funded research on science parks and gather experts in the area in order to stimulate an assessment of recent findings , as well as likely directions of future research .
The workshop will also explore policy needs for national-level indicators on science parks .
States and communities increasingly are recognizing that universities ' roles in research , innovation , faculty entrepreneurship , and workforce preparedness provide the critical foundation for successful tech-based economic development .
Paradoxically , the fiscal crises confronting all but four states is forcing difficult decisions regarding funding for higher education and tech-based economic development .
The State Science and Technology Institute ( SSTI ) sixth annual conference in Dearborn , MI will serve as a forum for nurturing stronger alliances between university and economic development officials during challenging financial times.The university track will allow participants to examine and strengthen higher education 's contributions toward forging local , state , and regional economic vitality .
The goals of this track are to ( 1 ) increase among technology-based economic development professionals recognition of and support for the important roles universities play in building technology-based economies ; ( 2 ) attract more university leadership and research administrators to participate in the gathering , allowing the opportunity to foster stronger working relationships with their state , local and regional economic development partners ; ( 3 ) provide a forum for universities to discuss shared challenges and issues in and examples of effective tools and techniques for increasing commercialization of university technology , building the research enterprise , encouraging faculty entrepreneurship , and preparing tomorrow 's workers and leaders ; and ( 5 ) promote interstate and intrastate cooperation toward common goals for research and economic development .
*** There is at present a worldwide effort to develop next-generation wireless communication systems .
It is envisioned that many of the future wireless systems will incorporate considerable signal processing intelligence in order to provide advanced services such as multimedia transmission .
In general , wireless channels can be very hostile media through which to communicate , due to substantial physical impediments , primarily radio-frequency interference and the time-varying nature of the channel .
The need to provide universal wireless access at high data rates ( which is the aim of many emerging wireless applications ) presents a major technical challenge , and meeting this challenge necessitates the development of advanced signal processing techniques for multiple-access communications in non-stationary interference-rich environments.This research involves the development of adaptive signal processing algorithms and architectures for application in future wireless communications systems featuring high user mobility , high data rate and high quality of service .
The primary emphases of this research are on advanced receiver signal processing techniques , and on advanced transmitter signal processing techniques for wireless systems .
The first of these focuses on developing adaptive signal reception techniques for jointly combating various impairments in time-varying wireless channels , such as radio-frequency interference ( narrowband interference , multiple-access interference , impulsive ambient noise ) , multipath fading , channel dispersion , etc .
A particular approach that will be examined in depth is the exploitation of the redundancy introduced by channel coding at the receiver for interference mitigation and channel tracking .
The second addresses adaptive signal transmission techniques in time-varying wireless channels for improving network capacity .
Specifically , adaptive antenna array transmission techniques and adaptive frequency hopping techniques are being studied , with the focus on rapid adaptivity to dynamic channel environments .
This research is expected to culminate in the formulation of novel signal processing techniques and system design concepts applicable to future wireless communication systems .
It is also anticipated that this research will influence many current and next generation communication systems planners and designers , to bring the promise of many new research techniques into the arena of wireless communications .
This ITR project is aimed at developing the foundations of a modern systems science that is simultaneously computational and physical ; it remarries time , concurrency , robustness , continuums , and resource management to computation .
This project , because of its focus on foundations , will provide a fundamentally new paradigm , based on hybrid systems , for modeling and analysis of many complex phenomena that occur in the physical and biological sciences on both microscopic and macroscopic levels .
These outcomes of the project are prerequisites for the deployment of embedded , autonomous computing in many safety-critical applications , from medical devices to transportation to national security needs in avionics .
The attention to a new education model will create a new generation of engineers who will be able to master the design of complex , heterogeneous systems that will be the backbone of the future IT industry.The proposed ITR has four focus areas of research .
( a ) Hybrid systems theory .
The focus here is on scaling up pioneering approaches that integrate physical modeling with computational systems .
( b ) Model-based design .
The main effort here is to develop a set of models with solid mathematical foundations that allow for the systematic integration of diverse efforts in system specification , design , synthesis , analysis and validation , execution , and design evolution ( c ) Advanced tool architectures .
The deliverables from this project will be a set of reusable , inter-operating software modules , freely distributed as open-source software .
( d ) Experimental research .
The program will leverage existing system-building efforts involving avionics , anti-terrorism technologies , vehicle electronics , and autonomous robots .
In addition we will apply our methods to networks of embedded systems for applications such as environment monitoring , building protection , and emergency response .
The impact of this change on teaching and research is profound , and will not be confined to the graduate level .
Based on the ongoing , groundbreaking effort at UCB , we propose to deliberately re-architect and retool undergraduate teaching at the participating institutions , and to engage in course development at a set of California community colleges with which UCB has established relationships and which have a high enrollment of Hispanic and African American students .
Faculty and graduate student researchers from minority and other institutions will be recruited each summer to participate in a program called SIPHER ( Summer Internship Program in Hybrid and Embedded Software Research ) .
This award supports an integrated research and education program that is centered on computing motion strategies in geometry-intensive applications .
A healthy synergy will be obtained by balancing efforts between both core issues and specialized applications .
The core of this research program is rooted in robot motion planning , and it is built on a broader unified mathematical framework that incorporates concepts from optimal control theory , computational geometry , statistical decision theory , and dynamic game theory .
This leads to the proposed investigation of three core algorithmic issues 1 ) searching high-dimensional spaces that have algebraic and differential constraints , 2 ) responding to unpredictable changes and on-line information , and 3 ) solving sensor-based tasks and processing incomplete information .
The focus is significantly broader than traditional path planning .
The core research is guided by efforts in several applications , such as mobile robotics with active sensing , virtual prototyping-hazardous environments .
These research efforts are incorporated into an education plan that 1 ) builds an interdisciplinary group of graduate students who are carefully guided through the education and research process , ii ) introduces undergraduates to research , particularly through mobile robotics and graphical simulation projects , iii ) takes steps towards an interdisiplinary curriculum in geometric algorithms , and iv ) helps those from disadvantaged backgrounds to realize their potential and excel in their careers .
This award provides partial support of the Gordon Conference on the Science , which will be held at Tilton School ( NH ) during the period August 11-16 , 2002 .
This conference is held every two years in summer , which to the true spirit of Gordon Conference , creates a lively environment to bring up cutting edge ideas and iron out controversial issues pertaining to adhesion science .
The 2002 conference will composed of nine sessions , with two to three speakers in each session .
In tune with the tradition of this conference , promising junior scientists have been invited along with established scientists from academia , government labs and industries as oral presenters and discussion leaders .
The conference will consist of 21 oral presentations that will deal with the interfacial , rheological and mechanics aspects of adhesion by highlighting the relevance of fundamental adhesion science in solving technologically important problems in coatings , structures , electronic , biological and MEMs devices .
The organizers intend to invite more junior faculty members , graduate students and postdocs to participate in the conference by presenting their research results in the poster session that will run throughout the conference .
In order to facilitate quality discussion quality discussions attendance to the conference will be restricted to 120 attendees , aiming to attain broad representation across the diverse participants in the field of adhesion science and engineering .
The objective of this research is to study protein dynamics by nuclear magnetic resonance ( NMR ) and computational approaches .
NMR relaxation parameters are now routinely measured for the protein backbone , but less so for protein side chains .
While side-chain relaxation studies have mainly focused on methyl group relaxation , the majority of side-chain carbon atoms belong to methylene moieties .
If not partially deuterated , dipole-dipole cross correlations generally make their relaxation behavior and their interpretation difficult .
New relaxation experiments are developed that efficiently suppress dipole-dipole cross-correlated relaxation in fully carbon-labeled proteins .
The relaxation data will be interpreted in terms of reorientational eigenmode dynamics ( RED ) analysis that integrates NMR relaxation data with molecular dynamics simulations for studying motional correlation effects in the ns and sub-ns time scale range .
Until recently , slower time-scale dynamics of proteins in the hundreds of ns to ms range have been very hard to assess for spins that do not show exchange broadening .
The advent of residual dipolar couplings is now opening up this time window for comprehensive experimental investigations .
By applying and improving the recently introduced model-free approach that uses dipolar coupling data in a variety of alignment media with different alignment tensors , protein dynamics on these slower time scales will be investigated for the protein backbone as well as for the side chains .
The dynamics information will be retrieved in the form of averaged spherical harmonics that define an order parameter as well as the anisotropy of motion .
Realistic analytical motional models will be developed to characterize motions of local protein fragments as well as collective motions involving amino-acid groups and whole secondary structural elements .
Structural dynamics of proteins play an important role in biochemical processes .
Detailed information on protein dynamics at an atomic level is of fundamental importance for understanding their function .
The overall goal of this research is the exploration and development of new experimental and computational methods for a comprehensive description of complex protein dynamics on widely different time scales and to demonstrate their applicability to biologically relevant systems .
In higher plants , each pollen grain contains two sperm cells that are delivered to the embryo sac .
One sperm fertilizes the egg and this fusion gives rise to the embryo that eventually grows into the plant .
The other sperm fertilizes another cell in the embryo sac and this second fusion gives rise to the endosperm , a nutritive tissue in the seed that is required for the development of the embryo .
Double fertilization is arguably the developmental process of most economic value in crop plants , because most foods are seeds or arise from seeds .
Double fertilization was discovered over 100 years ago .
But because of the relative inaccessibility of plant gametes , the molecular biology and mechanistics of this unique feature of the higher plant life cycle are barely understood .
In order to exploit gametes for crop improvement , it is necessary to know more about them.To facilitate a more global understanding of plant gamete gene expression , cDNA libraries will be constructed from isolated sperm , eggs , and embryo sacs of maize .
More than 5000 cDNAs from each library will be sequenced .
Expression profiles for about 200 diverse cDNAs from each library will be determined .
Plants with fluorescently-tagged gametes will be constructed to facilitate analysis of gamete function in gene disruption lines , and to facilitate imaging of fertilization .
Functional analyses will focus on genes predicted to encode surface-localized proteins that might mediate critical cellular interactions during double fertilization .
All sequences and stocks from this project will be available to the research community .
With this information about maize gamete gene expression , comparative genomics can be used to identify and manipulate gamete-expressed genes in diverse plant species .
A grant has been awarded to Dr. Bryan N. Danforth of Cornell University and Dr. Sedonia D. Sipes of Southern Illinois University at Carbondale to investigate the systematic relationships among bees , and the history of interactions between bees and flowering plants .
Bees are a large group of insects ( ~20,000 species ) whose history is intertwined with that of flowering plants .
Today , bees are the most important pollinators of many of the world 's food crops .
Additionally , many wild plants depend upon bee pollinators for reproduction ; thus bees play an important role in maintaining plant biodiversity .
Yet , little is known about the earliest bees , or about the early flowering plants they may have pollinated , because all known bee fossils are either relatively recent in age , or are of highly advanced rather than primitive species .
Moreover , the relationships among the seven families of bees are unclear from the study of their morphology alone .
Danforth and Sipes propose to 1 ) reconstruct the relationships among the bees , with emphasis on the most primitive taxa ( the short-tongued bees ) , using DNA sequences from three genes combined with morphological data .
Additionally the investigators will use the DNA data in a model-based approach to estimate dates of key events in the history of the bees , and relate these dates to angiosperm history as recorded in the fossil record .
This project will expand our understanding of the relationships and classification of the most important pollinators of flowering plants ( bees ) , and will have implications for crop pollination , biodiversity , and conservation .
This project will provide educational and research training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students at both SIUC and Cornell University .
Students involved with the project will gain broadly applicable experience in basic molecular biology as well as training in the specific fields of insect systematics and pollination ecology .
Additionally , the award will provide professional-level training for a postdoctoral researcher at Cornell .
All cells arise from existing cells .
The doubling of contents and partitioning of those contents to daughter cells must be carefully controlled in all organisms .
The septin family of proteins plays a central role in organizing proper growth and division of the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae and likely plays a similar role in many other eukaryotes .
Septin complexes appear to function as scaffolds , recruiting and tethering other proteins to appropriate sites .
Among the proteins that localize to the yeast division plane in a septin-dependent manner are enzymes responsible for cross-wall synthesis and cell cycle regulators that appear to coordinate growth with nuclear division.While most knowledge of septin function comes from elegant work in the unicellular fungus S. cerevisiae , septins have also been found in multicellular fungi and in animals .
Five septin genes , aspA-aspE , have been identified in the filamentous fungus Aspergillus nidulans .
In this multicellular fungus a single septin , AspBp , localizes to several different structures ( septa , branches , and conidiophores ) .
AspBp localization is post-mitotic at septa where the localization pattern changes from a single ring to a double ring back to a single ring during septal development .
AspBp localization is pre-mitotic at branches where the localization pattern changes from a compact patch to a diffuse collar as branches emerge.The central hypothesis for this research is that complexes at septa , nascent branches , and conidiophores in A. nidulans contain different combinations of both septin and non-septin proteins and that membership within the same complex will vary over time as development proceeds .
This hypothesis will be tested using a variety of approaches .
Mutant phenotypes and localization will be examined for all five septins .
Interactions among septins and between septins and other proteins will be identified using genetic and biochemical methods .
Selected non-septin proteins that interact with septin complexes at septa will be localized .
These studies will exploit the ability to predict and manipulate the development of septa , and to a lesser extent other structures , in A. nidulans .
The proposed studies will likely lead to a better understanding of septin function in multicellular organisms and of basic processes in the development of filamentous fungi .
This project will produce new information about climatic changes and human impacts along the Northern Frontier of Mesoamerica , A.D. 500-900 , a period when civilization touched areas previously populated by small farming villages and bands of hunter-gatherers .
In Guanajuato , Jalisco , Zacatecas , and Durango , Mexico , large ceremonial centers sprang up , surrounded by clusters of population .
One such population cluster around the site of La Quemada , Zacatecas , is the scene for this study .
Between A.D. 500-900 , a large community dominated the valley and its tributaries with a monumental ceremonial center , roadways , extensive terrace systems , and over 200 villages along the Malpaso River .
Professor Ben Nelson and doctoral candidate Michelle Elliott of Arizona State University , along with Professor Christopher Fisher of Kent State University , will collaborate with geologist Roberto Molina of the National Autonomous University , to collect plant remains , sediments , magnetic samples , and charcoal for radiocarbon dating and to create a geological map of the area .
They and other scientists will analyze the samples to test hypotheses about changes in vegetation , erosion , floodplain characteristics , and fires that occurred before , during , and after a period of intensive human settlement around La Quemada .
They will recover this information by cutting trenches in the floodplain as well as by surveying the landscape to record landforms and parent materials that may have contributed to the accumulation of sediments and soils in the floodplain .
Their goal is to reconstruct the history of that accumulation and its relationship to human occupation.Archaeologists have long suspected that the changes in the environment played a role in civilization 's fluctuations in this region .
They hypothesize that colonists settled the frontier during a period of increased rainfall and that several centuries later , a climatic reversal led to the region 's abandonment .
Since Pedro Armillas formulated this arid margin hypothesis , archaeologists have learned a great deal the settlements centered on La Quemada .
Recent research has clarified many aspects of this occupation , but the information is inadequate to address the arid margin hypothesis .
The collected materials will allow systematic evaluation of this hypothesis with several independent classes of data , including pollen , phytoliths , macrobotanical remains , magnetic susceptibility , sediment characterization , and radiocarbon assays.Archaeologists have not investigated ancient environmental change in any part of the Northern Frontier in such a comprehensive way .
To the north of the study area , studies of desert streams in the American Southwest indicate precipitation flux for this period ; to the south , lake deposits contain evidence for potentially related events .
Experience shows , however , that events in one valley or lake can not be readily predicted from those in another .
This study will provide information that will ultimately allow evaluation of human-environmental interactions on a long time scale over a wide region .
The investigators plan to communicate their findings not only to people in their own profession , but to a range of ecologists , geologists , geographers , government officials , and interested community members .
ADLER - 0211480In natural systems , organisms face simultaneous direct and indirect interactions with mutualists andantagonists , yet our understanding of the relative importance of these competing pressures inshaping the evolution of phenotypic traits is still rudimentary .
For example , flowering plants mayface the dilemma of attracting pollinators while discouraging floral enemies , such as nectarrobbers .
Because robbers are competing with pollinators for the same resource ( e.g. , nectar ) , it maybe particularly difficult for plants to evolve defensive mechanisms that are effective againstantagonists without also deterring mutualists .
The goal of the proposed research is to determinehow a ubiquitous but poorly understood floral trait , toxic nectar , influences interactions with bothnectar robbers and pollinators , and how these simultaneous interactions shape selection on thisphenotypic trait.Toxic nectar , or nectar that contains secondary compounds , is a widespread trait that may conferresistance to floral robbers , but at a potential cost to pollinator attraction .
Currently , the costs andbenefits of toxic nectar are unknown .
In addition to resistance traits , plants may cope withantagonists via tolerance .
The concepts of resistance and tolerance have traditionally been used inreference to herbivores ; however , nectar robbers , like herbivores , have profound effects on plantfitness and plants are likely to use resistance and tolerance as defensive mechanisms againstrobbers .
The proposed research will extend resistance and tolerance concepts to a wider range ofplant-animal interactions through an examination of the role of nectar traits , such as nectar toxicityand production , as mechanisms of resistance and tolerance to nectar robbing.The aim of this work is to understand the ecological role of toxic nectar within the context ofinteractions between mutualists ( pollinators ) and antagonists ( nectar robbers ) , and to determine theextent to which resistance and tolerance mediate the impact of nectar robbers on plant genotypes.The research proposed will experimentally manipulate nectar toxicity in Gelsemium sempervirens , a perennial vine with documented alkaloids in its nectar , to determine the impact of toxic nectar onthe community of insect pollinators and robbers as well as on male and female plant reproductionand offspring success .
In addition , this study will manipulate nectar robbing and pollination ingenotypes of G. sempervirens with known variability in nectar toxicity to determine the direct andindirect effects of nectar robbing on plant fitness , genetic variation in resistance and tolerance tonectar robbing , and costs of toxic nectar in the absence of nectar robbing .
The research combinesmanipulative field experiments with observations to address four main questions 1 ) Is theregenetic variation in nectar toxicity ?
2 ) Does toxic nectar benefit plants by increasing resistance tonectar robbing without reducing pollinator attraction ?
3 ) Does nectar robbing reduce plant fitnessdirectly or indirectly , and do plant genotypes vary in their resistance or tolerance of nectar robbing ? and 4 ) Is there a cost of toxic nectar in the absence of robbing ? The work proposed here is novel in that it integrates the costs and benefits of resistance associatedwith a ubiquitous but poorly understood floral trait , toxic nectar , in the context of joint forces ofselection exerted by both mutualistic and antagonistic floral visitors .
This work extends an existingconceptual framework and provides empirical insight into the diversity of roles a single floral traitcan serve , from attraction to defense .
Consideration of the broader context in which organismsevolve is fundamental to our understanding of how multiple-species interactions shape genetic andbiological diversity at ecological , microevolutionary , and macroevolutionary scales .
Project SummaryThis proposal seeks $ 15,000 from NSF to support fifteen $ 1,000 graduate student andpostdoctoral travel stipends for participation in the Society for Conservation Biologyannual meeting at the University of Kent in Canterbury , U.K. , July 14-19 , 2002.Participants will be selected based on the conceptual significance of the conservationbiology issue addressed including quality of the research design and analysis ; applicability of the research to environmental problem solving ; written organization anddata presentation ; merit and feasibility of the applicant & # 8217 ; s rationale for why her ( his ) research will be substantially enhanced through participation in the U.K. meeting , as well as how ( s ) he will disseminate results from the experience upon return to the U.S. ( e.g. , through networks developed at the meeting or through local chapters of the SCB ) .Participants will co-author an article about the meeting for the November , 2002 , SCBNewsletter .
New scientists and students will be strongly encouraged to attend the Fourth International Conference on Borate Glasses , Crystals , and Melts .
This meeting will take place at Coe College in Cedar Rapids , IA from July 14-18 , 2002 .
In particular , women and minority members will be actively sought out and invited to participate in the meeting .
There are many recent developments within the field that will be addressed including new variations of spectroscopic techniques that are capable of probing the intermediate range order in borate glasses , novel preparation techniques , reports of new non-oxide boron-containing glasses and crystals , industrial uses of borates , improvements in computer modeling of atomic structure , and recent advances in out knowledge of related crystalline compounds .
% % % The most important aspect of this project will be the very strong student participation in this meeting , at both the undergraduate and graduate levels .
We think our approach is justified because it will result in a much stronger than usual involvement of students at a professional meeting , more scientific interactions between students from different research groups , and feedback to those who make presentations from an excellent cross-section of experienced scientists in the field .
A critical mass of 50 to 75 students will encourage their full participation in the conference .
Several discussion sessions targeting students and new scientists will be scheduled .
We believe this approach may serve as a model for student and new scientist participation in scientific conferences in the future .
*** The goals of this NSF Plant Genome project are to demonstrate that the transposon Ac ( Activator ) can be used as a gene identification and isolation tool , as well as a mutagen , in the complex maize genome , and to develop the necessary tools to facilitate that use .
The first goal was met in the initial phase of this project where Ac was shown to insert exclusively in or close to genes and to be , therefore , an excellent gene-searching engine in the highly repetitive maize genome .
A highly embryogenic bz wx inbred line was developed and transformed with Ac* and Ds* constructs that had been modified to facilitate the PCR isolation of the transposon-adjacent sequence .
The main goal of the second phase of this project is to create a comprehensive set of transgenic lines that will serve as starting points for the production of future insertion libraries .
This phase will occur in two well-defined stages .
The first will be to demonstrate the germinal transposition of an engineered Ac* or Ds* element and the ready isolation of DNA adjacent to the transposon .
The second will be to identify a method of maize transformation that will enable the production of a useful set of transposon lines for localized mutagenesis .
Once the above two objectives have been met , the last stage of the project to produce a set of 124 transgenic lines with a uniquely marked element at evenly spaced locations in the genome will be initiated .
In that set , most genes in the maize genome will be within 7 cM of a launching platform and will be , therefore , realistic targets in a localized transposon mutagenesis experiment .
These lines will be deposited in the Maize Stock Center and will serve as starting materials for the generation of future insertion libraries by interested scientists .
Henry T. Nguyen NguyenHenry @ missouri.edu ( Principal Investigator current ) Julia Gross ( Co-Principal Investigator current ) Hans J. Bohnert ( Co-Principal Investigator current ) Robert E. Sharp ( Co-Principal Investigator current ) Gordon K. Springer ( Co-Principal Investigator current ) Daniel P. Schachtman ( Co-Principal Investigator current ) Georgia Davis ( Co-Principal Investigator current ) The roots of plants play vital roles in water and mineral acquisition which are essential for plant growth and development .
Under conditions of drought , roots can adapt to continue growth while at the same time producing and sending early warning signals to shoots which inhibit the plant growth above ground .
A Plant Root Genomics Consortium has been formed and is dedicated to root genetics and physiology.The broad aim is to develop an understanding of the molecular mechanisms used by plant roots to acquire water and minerals from the soil , to elucidate the role roots play in adaptation to drought conditions , and to transfer this knowledge to crop improvement through biotechnology .
This project focuses mechanisms of root growth maintenance and root to shoot signaling under water deficits .
The research approach is interdisciplinary encompassing whole plant physiology , genetics , genomics , and proteomics.The specific aims are to identify the genes and biochemical networks controlling the mechanisms of root growth and root to shoot communication under drought through four specific objectives ( 1 ) Characterization of the transcript profiles in elongating and non-elongating regions of roots under water deficit in sensitive and tolerant maize lines , an abscisic acid ( ABA ) -deficient mutant and near-isogenic lines differing in ABA accumulation .
( 2 ) Characterization of the changes in protein profiles , especially cell wall proteins , in the different root regions to identify factors associated with root growth maintenance and tolerance to water deficit .
( 3 ) Investigation of the production and transport of root signals to provide a better understanding of root to shoot signaling under drought .
( 4 ) Development of genetic and genomic resources for further investigations of root growth and signaling in the field.This knowledge will lead to novel approaches for improving drought tolerance in maize through genetic and metabolic engineering of root functions .
All materials will be made publicly available .
A Plant Root Genomics Web site will be maintained and integrated with the maize genome database ( MaizeDB ) at the University of Missouri-Columbia .
This award by the Inorganic , Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program supports research by Professor Jack R. Norton in the Department of Chemistry at Columbia University to facilitate the synthesis and manufacture of compounds of interest to the pharmaceutical industry .
The rates at which zirconaziridine enantiomers interconvert will be measured and reactions of metallaaziridines with epoxides and aziridines will be developed .
In addition , the one-electron chemistry of alkyl complexes similar to those that serve as precursors for olefin polymerization catalysts will be investigated .
The electrochemistry of boranes and related alumoxanes will be explored in order to determine whether single-electron transfer is involved in catalyst activation by these compounds .
The effects of small amounts of reducing agents on catalytic olefin polymerization will be determined .
New reagents and methods will be developed to better understand and improve the synthesis of pharmaceuticals and polymers .
The goal of this research project is to use disaggregated data and theoretical models to study the behavior of bank balance sheet variables like loans and equity and their importance for real activity .
The motivating factor is that the additional variation observed across the disaggregated elements of the data provides an enormously rich source of new empirical information that can be used not only to learn about the behavior of the disaggregated variables but also to understand the behavior of aggregate variables .
The contribution of this project consists of constructing and disseminating consistently defined disaggregated data sets of bank loans .
Bank loans are disaggregated into three bank loan components Commercial and industrial ( C & I ) loans , real estate , and consumer loans .
Empirical as well as theoretical studies typically focus on total bank loans , even though the observed time series behavior of the three components clearly differs .
Bank loans are also disaggregated by region .
The advantage of disaggregating bank loans by region is that one can match regional financial measures like bank loans with corresponding regional real activity measures .
Several studies have documented that this link is quite strong for business loans .
This is because these loans are not standardized products and the relationship between firms and banks is clearly an important element in the market for business loans .
The data are also disaggregated by bank size .
This is important because the balance sheets of small banks are quite different than those of large banks and because of , for example , informational asymmetries , small banks are more likely to suffer from financial frictions in obtaining time deposits .
The data are posted on the investigator 's website .
In the future , communications systems are expected to be characterized asubiquitous , pervasive , very mobile , and highly distributed , among other at-tributes .
In contrast to current systems , such as cellular systems or thecurrent Internet , the reliance on central network components will be muchreduced and ad hoc methods for forming networks will become more preva-lent .
Additionally , the number of connected devices , including both sensorsand actuators as well as processors , will increase dramatically and manynetwork devices will operate autonomously .
Massive quantities of data ofvarious highly structured formats will need to be accessed and distributedacross these networks .
Wireless and wireline systems will interconnect withoptical fiber and free space communications media.This workshop is intended to bring together a distinguished group ofresearch scientists/educators and industry and government experts to discussand identify critical research in communications to support this vision .
Theworkshop will provide an opportunity to interact with experts from relatedfields , primarily computer science , working on different aspects of futurecommunication systems .
A list of invitees for this workshop is provided inthe appendix.The workshop aims to identify research challenges and opportunities as-sociated with the emerging vision for future communications systems .
Weexpect a report to come out of the workshop reflecting the themes discussed .
This award by the Inorganic , Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program supports research by Russell P Hughes , Department of Chemistry , Dartmouth College , in fluorocarbon bond activation by transition metals .
Hughes is developing novel catalytic routes to convert chlorofluorocarbons ( CFCs ) and perfluorocarbons ( PFCs ) to hydrofluorocarbons ( HFCs ) .
Aliphatic C-F bonds in fluoroalkyl groups bonded to a cationic iridium center undergo facile reaction with hydrogen gas under ambient conditions , resulting in the substitution of a C-H bond for the C-F bond .
The fluoroalkyl groups may also react with methane to make a new carbon-carbon bond .
By further study , the scope of these important reactions will be expanded to new substrates and catalysts .
Perfluorocarbons and chlorofluorocarbons are industrially important chemicals used as refrigerants , foaming agents and solvents .
However these compounds also are implicated in ozone depletion and global warming .
Hydrofluorocarbons have many of the same useful properties , yet are more environmentally friendly .
This research may lead to new useful HFCs as well as provide a new way to deactivate and recycle PFCs and CFCs .
This dissertation enhancement grant supports Bradley Taylor under the direction of Robert O .
Hall of the University of Wyoming to study the impacts of a migratory detrivorous fish on nitrogen cycling in a tropical stream in Venezuela .
This award supports research that is novel in integrating the impacts of a single fish species on multiple components of the nitrogen cycle .
Ecologists are fundamentally interested in the degree to which organisms influence ecosystem structure and function .
Although much attention has focused on the relationship between species diversity and ecosystem function for plant taxa , our understanding of how animals influence ecosystem function is still in its infancy.This proposal focuses on migratory fish ( Prochilodus mariae ) that is a potentially strong interactor in tropical Andean streams and builds on previous work to test whether this single species affects the stream nitrogen cycle , a fundamental component of ecosystem function .
Fast hydrogen , nitrogen , and oxygen atoms in the energy range 1-100 eV and higher are produced in the earth 's upper atmosphere through phenomena such as photodissociation , radiative recombination , dissociative recombination , dissociative attachment , charge exchange , and superelastic ( quenching ) collisions .
Many of these phenomena are induced by lightning discharges , which are responsible for emissions known as elves , red sprites , and blue jets .
The fast atoms collide with species such as N2 , O2 , NO , H2O , CO2 , etc .
to produce , either through chemical reaction or direct excitation of the target , emissions in the upper atmosphere and thermosphere such as the hydrogen nighttime and polar-cusp aurora , and the hot oxygen corona and geocorona .
Using a unique experimental facility at JPL , constructed with prior NSF support , fast ground-state hydrogen and oxygen atoms will be generated in the laboratory energy range 2-100 eV .
The fast atoms will be used to study two classes of atmospheric reactions with the important species N2 , O2 , and NO .
These classes are ( a ) infrared ( vibrational ) excitation and emission , where cross sections are measured using an integrating sphere coupled to a HgCdTe infrared detector ; and ( b ) electron-capture and stripping , where cross-section and mass/charge ratio measurements are made using a Penning ion trap .
0211048Bar-YamThere is a new and growing effort to understand complex systems and complexity that has stimulated widespread interest in the scientific community .
This grant will enable the participation of students , postdoctoral fellows and and other junior scientists in the International Conference on Complex Systems ( ICCS ) .
Sessions will focus on unified conceptual and mathematical strategies and theirapplications to physical , biological and social systems .
The conference includes pedagogical sessions for students and topics of interest and concern to the public that will serve as vehicles of education and communication for a broader audience .
A special topical day will address recent advances in the study of evolutionand several sessions will focus on biocomplexity , ecology andmultiscale patterns coupling biological , physical and social systems.Various conferences and workshops have addressed aspects of these growing efforts to understand complex systems .
However , the ICCS is the only major international conference series to bring the wide diversity of research together , demonstrating the interdisciplinary yet integrative and coherent nature of these efforts .
This conference series is organized by the New England Complex Systems Institute ( NECSI ) .
Genes transformed back into the organism of origin often cause silencing of dispersed homologous copies , including the endogenous gene .
Two types of silencing occur .
One is transcriptional and involves changes in chromatin structure as evidenced by the accumulation of Polycomb Group proteins on the silenced transgene insertion sites .
The other involves post-transcriptional RNA turnover in a similar manner to RNA interference .
Emerging evidence has indicated potential connections among RNA interference , post-transcriptional silencing and transcriptional transgene silencing .
In this project , a genetic and molecular approach will be undertaken to determine any relationship among these types of silencing .
Transgenes of the Alcohol dehydrogenase ( Adh ) and white ( w ) eye color genes in Drosophila will be used as a model system .
First , a series of constructs will be transformed that do or do not exhibit gene expression to determine whether transcriptional silencing requires the expression of the silencing gene to occur .
If silencing can only occur when the homologous sequences are expressed , an RNA mediated process would be implicated in causing the chromatin changes that are associated with the cases of transcriptional silencing .
Secondly , the interrelationship between RNAi-like mechanisms and transcriptional silencing will be examined .
A construct predicted to induce post-transcriptional silencing of Adh will be tested for its ability to produce either type of silencing .
Next , mutations that block post-transcriptional silencing will be tested for their influence on pairing sensitive silencing .
Further , a transgene predicted to generate double stranded RNA homologous to Adh promoter regions will be produced and tested for its ability to induce transcriptional silencing .
Studies of gene silencing are likely to reveal new information about gene expression and nuclear dynamics in multicellular eukaryotes .
One role of these silencing mechanisms is as a protection against viruses and transposons , although many of the genes that have been identified in the process are also known to affect developmental mechanisms .
Understanding the basic processes of gene silencing has the potential to lead to virus protection and to have applications in gene therapy .
The investigators consider a general system of nonlinearnonlocal hyperbolic equations describing the dynamics of severalinteracting populations .
The goal of the project is to developtheories on the existence-uniqueness , long-time behavior , andnumerical approximation of solutions to the hyperbolic system .
Acombination of analytical and numerical methods is used tounderstand the dynamics of the complex proposed model .
To studyexistence and uniqueness of solutions to this system , two majorapproaches are adopted .
The first approach to study thewell-posedness of solutions is via the finite difference methodused for classical conservation laws .
The second approach toinvestigate the well-posedness and long-time behavior ofsolutions is based on the monotone approximation and comparisonresults that have been successfully established for thesemilinear case by the investigators .
Although similar approacheshave been used in studying other nonlinear partial differentialequation models , their applications to special cases of thegeneral nonlinear and nonlocal model considered in this projecthave only been carried out by the investigators .
In addition , anumerical methodology is developed for an inverse problemgoverned by the proposed nonlinear nonlocal system of equations.It uses a connection between real data and the model to estimateunknown parameters .
Meanwhile , a numerical package is developedfor simulating the proposed model .
Many populations and their interactions with the environmenthave been modeled using the structured population approach , wherethe structures of interest are induced by internalcharacteristics such as age or size .
For example , size-structuredpopulation models with distributed rates have been successfullyused to describe the dynamics of mosquitofish in California ricefields .
The structured population approach has also been used tomodel the dynamics of hierarchically structured populations inwhich the differences between individuals have a direct effect onthe availability of resources .
Another application is thepredator-prey interaction between zooplankton and phytoplanktonwithin the context of algal aggregation .
Generally speaking , inorder to analyze , manage , and control the dynamics of apopulation , it is necessary to understand the interactionsbetween the population evolution and its environment .
In thisproject , the investigators study a general structured populationmodel .
Due to its complexity , a combination of analytical andnumerical methods is developed to investigate the dynamics ofsuch a population .
In particular , a numerical package to simulatethe proposed model is provided .
Furthermore , certain techniquesare introduced to estimate the growth and mortality forindividuals within the population from field data .
Because of thegenerality of the proposed model , the results help to answerquestions about nonlinear phenomena in population dynamics .
Inaddition , the resulting numerical method can be used bypopulation biologists to investigate the dynamical behavior ofgeneral population models .
The investigators consider a general system of nonlinearnonlocal hyperbolic equations describing the dynamics of severalinteracting populations .
The goal of the project is to developtheories on the existence-uniqueness , long-time behavior , andnumerical approximation of solutions to the hyperbolic system .
Acombination of analytical and numerical methods is used tounderstand the dynamics of the complex proposed model .
To studyexistence and uniqueness of solutions to this system , two majorapproaches are adopted .
The first approach to study thewell-posedness of solutions is via the finite difference methodused for classical conservation laws .
The second approach toinvestigate the well-posedness and long-time behavior ofsolutions is based on the monotone approximation and comparisonresults that have been successfully established for thesemilinear case by the investigators .
Although similar approacheshave been used in studying other nonlinear partial differentialequation models , their applications to special cases of thegeneral nonlinear and nonlocal model considered in this projecthave only been carried out by the investigators .
In addition , anumerical methodology is developed for an inverse problemgoverned by the proposed nonlinear nonlocal system of equations.It uses a connection between real data and the model to estimateunknown parameters .
Meanwhile , a numerical package is developedfor simulating the proposed model .
Many populations and their interactions with the environmenthave been modeled using the structured population approach , wherethe structures of interest are induced by internalcharacteristics such as age or size .
For example , size-structuredpopulation models with distributed rates have been successfullyused to describe the dynamics of mosquitofish in California ricefields .
The structured population approach has also been used tomodel the dynamics of hierarchically structured populations inwhich the differences between individuals have a direct effect onthe availability of resources .
Another application is thepredator-prey interaction between zooplankton and phytoplanktonwithin the context of algal aggregation .
Generally speaking , inorder to analyze , manage , and control the dynamics of apopulation , it is necessary to understand the interactionsbetween the population evolution and its environment .
In thisproject , the investigators study a general structured populationmodel .
Due to its complexity , a combination of analytical andnumerical methods is developed to investigate the dynamics ofsuch a population .
In particular , a numerical package to simulatethe proposed model is provided .
Furthermore , certain techniquesare introduced to estimate the growth and mortality forindividuals within the population from field data .
Because of thegenerality of the proposed model , the results help to answerquestions about nonlinear phenomena in population dynamics .
Inaddition , the resulting numerical method can be used bypopulation biologists to investigate the dynamical behavior ofgeneral population models .
0211036ElzarkiDescription This award is for support of a joint research project by Dr. Magda El Zarki , Department of Information and Computer Sciences at the University of California at Irvine , Irvine , California and Dr. Hussein Eissa , Computer and Systems Department at the Electronics Research Institute ( ERI ) , Cairo , Egypt .
The project addresses videoconferencing over the Internet .
The two investigators plan to develop a particular model for a differentiated services ( diffserv ) architecture and to evaluate this model through simulation .
They will explore the implementation of the diffserv architecture in the OPNET simulator , and study the performance of the architecture with both real-time and non-real-time traffic .
They plan to analyze the video/audio characteristics by using videoconferencing applications & capturing the generated packets to draw the packet PDF curves ( packet size and packet interarrival time ) .
The new proposed model is to guarantee the required quality by using some of the Diffserv simple blocks at edge devices .
It also uses the IP Multicast mechanism where possible , to save more network resources .
The new model is to rely on shaping the out-of-profile streams , dropping packets in case of real-time marked packets , and re-marking packets in case of non real-time marked packets .
By implementing these simple blocks in the edge devices , the overload on the core routers will be minimized.ScopeThis project will provide better understanding of video/audio streams over the Internet .
and should advance the state of art in multimedia networking .
The project will lead to a strong collaboration between the U.S. and Egyptian institutions .
The collaboration between the two PIs is likely to be productive since they have had prior interaction , while Dr. Eissa was carrying out his doctorate research in the year 2000 in the United States .
The visits by the staff from UC at Irvine and the ERI will be beneficial to the two institutions , and will help graduate students in Egypt , especially with the experimental and simulation component tasks .
The investigator aims to complete the nascent theory ofoutput-sensitive algorithms in real algebraic geometry.Output-sensitive in this context means that the complexity of theunderlying algorithm depends mainly on intrinsic geometricparameters , e.g. , the number of connected components of theunderlying solution set , as opposed to extrinsic parameters likethe degrees of the input polynomials .
Such algorithms are fasterthan the traditional methods of computational algebra by a factorexponential in the dimension , but have so far been discoveredonly in various isolated contexts .
So a unified algorithmicapproach has a broad impact .
Furthermore , the underlyingapproach takes numerical conditioning into account from theoutset , thus providing algorithms that are certifiably preciseeven when applied to approximate data .
Another novelty is thatthe underlying theory applies in the even broader arena of realand p-adic analytic functions .
The algorithmic aspects of p-adicanalytic functions are almost completely unexplored , so asecondary focus of this project is to elaborate and apply thisnew theory to equation-solving over finite fields and motivicintegration .
The investigator combines advanced techniques from numericalanalysis and algebraic geometry to provide a new approach to afundamental problem occuring in many applications solvinganalytic inequalities .
For example , finding the optimalallocation of resources in a large organization ( e.g. , an army , an airline , or a large business ) has long been known to reduce tosolving linear inequalities .
From a different direction , it isknown that the complexity of certain neural net architectures ( which are useful in training automated bomb-sniffers and patternrecognition systems ) depends critically on understanding thesolutions of nonlinear polynomial inequalities .
Both theseexamples are special cases of analytic inequalities , and thisproject provides new algorithms for their solution that aremagnitudes faster than current algorithms .
Furthermore , thesenew algorithms provide certifiably precise solutions -- - afeature which is especially important when facing uncertainphysical data .
Another novel aspect is the principalinvestigator 's recent discovery that the underlying techniquesapply to an even broader context , which can provide new solutionsto many problems in the design of cryptosystems .
A compact , thermal-image furnace has been developed in conjunction with synchrotron radiation to collect in situ high-temperature powder diffraction data on selected oxide ceramics in air up to 2400 C. The experimental data is analysed and compared with theoretical predictions by the Rietveld crystallographic , profile fitting technique .
The ultimate aim of this research project is to investigate detailed mechanisms of crystal structure changes involved in ferroelastic phase transformations in selected materials , using in situ synchrotron XRD , hot stage optical microscopy and TEM techniques .
Specifically , phase transformations involving negligible or zero volume changes , but possibly some unit cell shape changes will be focused upon .
Phase transformations in tantalum oxide ( Ta2O5 ) and lanthanide tantalates ( LnTaO4 ) , as well as lanthanide aluminates will be studied .
In this manner , the structure-property relationships of the materials could be better understood and tailored for application , e.g. , in toughening mechanisms , large force actuation and shape memory ceramics .
Preliminary studies will be made on some of the mechanical properties of key ferroelastic materials This objective of this project is to undertake in-situ high-temperature studies of phase transformations in oxide ceramics , using our newly-invented , thermal-image furnace , capable of 2400 C in air , in conjunction with synchrotron radiation .
The emphasis is on oxide materials exhibiting polymorphic phase transformations , especially of a ferroelastic nature , at elevated temperatures .
This is inline with our on-going research efforts in identifying potential materials with new , energy absorbing mechanisms , which have applications in the design of tough , high-temperature composites .
Furthermore , as a result of domain rearrangement by ferroelastic mechanisms , potential applications are possible in large force actuation and shape memory behavior .
This dissertation project examines the relationship between the rights of citizenship and the politics of race in Britain between 1948 and 1968 .
It will address three questions .
First , how were the unstable boundaries between state and society demarcated along the lines of race after1945 , when advocates of minority concerns increasingly defined civil rights in terms of the state 's responsibility to prevent discrimination in the private sector ?
Second , how did members of both anti-racist organizations and the legal profession assess the efficacy of working within liberal and egalitarian framework to advance minority concerns ?
Third , what criteria were employed to legally define classes of people deserving state protection against discrimination , particularly in the drafting and enactment of the Race Relations Acts of 1965 and 1968 ?
To answer these questions , the Co-Principal Investigator will engage in archival research to examine the specific processes and debates through which egalitarian arguments and the codification of citizenship became linked most explicitly with the politics of race .
0211214FarrahDescription This award is to support a collaborative project between Dr. Samuel Farrah , Professor in the Department of Microbiology and Cell Science and in the Engineering Research Center for Particle Science and Technology ( ERC/PS & T ) at the University of Florida , Gainesville , Florida and Dr. Nagui Abdel-Khalek , Central Metallurgical Research and Development Institute , Helwan , Cairo , Egypt .
The two scientists plan to investigate mechanisms involved in the application of biologically active species to achieve better solid/solid and solid/liquid separations , with the specific aim of separation of phosphate from its associated carbonates during flotation process and the dewatering of slimes of extremely fine particles .
The final objective is to develop a predictive methodology that can be used to optimize the process by determining the performance of various bacteria , their adsorption behaviors on the mineral surfaces , and the surface properties of the bacteria and the minerals .
The tasks of the project include microbial sample collection , growing and characterization of microorganisms , fundamental study of the adsorption of microorganisms onto apatite and dolomite minerals and clay sample , flotation of phosphate samples of different composition from the U.S. and from Egypt , and economic evaluation of the processes .
The two teams will share responsibilities in these tasks.Scope This project aims to advance new processes for solid-liquid separation and also for solid-solid separation , particularly for those minerals of similar surface properties such as separation of apatite from dolomite and/or calcite .
Flotation of dolomitic phosphates in both countries is not yet commercialized .
The United States and Egypt are both major producers of phosphate , which generates huge amounts of slime as waste from different industries .
Advancing new technologies that depend on surface modification of minerals through application of microorganisms during flotation or flocculation of fine and ultrafine particles will enhance their separation with high selectivity , with reduced adverse environmental impacts .
The ERC/PS & T and the CMRDI have the necessary facilities and resources to conduct this research .
The results of this study are expected to benefit both countries , especially if the developed processes are be applied to other materials .
This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program , which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative activities .
This is an RUI collaborative research project among three physics programs at neighboring state universities Angelo State University , Tarleton State University , and Southwest Texas State Uni-versity .
The project focuses on three main topics ( 1 ) correlation between electrical and optical properties and stress in ZnO and nitrogen-doped ZnO fabricated at reduced temperatures using radical atomic beam processing , ( 2 ) feasibility of fabricating predicted ZnO-Mn and Zn-Co room temperature transparent magnetic semiconductors , and ( 3 ) dielectric properties of select amor-phous or potentially epitaxial insulator oxide alloys consisting of Pr-Al-O , Gd-Ga-O , Hf-Al-O , Pr-Zr-O and La- Hf-O ( most with possible oxynitridation and alloy-dependent band gap variabil-ity ) relevant for magnetic spin tunneling structures and next-generation CMOS gate applications .
A study towards the stabilization and characterization of metastable Ni-incorporated Cu-Ge and Co- Ge thin film crystalline phases will also be included .
Thin film materials fabrication will be conducted using ion beam sputter processing strategies .
The approach is to implement mono-energetic Ar + or Xe + ions ( < 1 keV ) to control incident film adatom energy ( between ~ 6 eV to ~ 20 eV ) , and vary the substrate angle of incidence to promote kinetic film growth at reduced temperatures with and without reflected energetic Ar/Xe atom bombardment .
Low energy ( < 100 eV ) reactive ( O2 + /N2 + ) assist ion beams will be compared with neutral thermal atomic radi-cals to promote optimal oxidation ( and dopant nitridation ) at reduced substrate temperatures .
The implementation of in-situ low energy and/or neutral atomic radical species to promote reactive sputtering is relatively unique for ion beam sputtering and is not possible with magnetron sput-tering due to its higher operating pressure regime .
The group also has the capability of processing sputtered films with rapid thermal annealing and high-energy ( < 1 MeV ) inert ion mixing to study germanide formation in amorphous deposited metal-Ge films .
% % % The project addresses fundamental research issues in a topical area of materials science having technological relevance .
An important feature of the project is the strong emphasis on education , and the integration of research and education .
Undergraduates from all three universities will be involved in multiple phases of the research , with strong participation from underrepresented groups .
In addition to ion beam sputtering , students will be involved with rapid thermal process-ing , electrical transport studies , ion beam analysis , scanning electron microscopy with EDS , ad-vanced x-ray diffraction and fluorescence analysis , magnetometry , and optical characterization ( reflectivity , FTIR , photoluminescence ) .
In addition , students will have a chance to collabora-tively interact with Central Texas microelectronics industry scientists and doctoral institution re-search teams interested in the project .
All three collaborating universities are close enough to permit an active degree of inter-university group visits and student exchanges to support the re-search .
The research will encourage students to consider pursuing research at various materials-related doctoral programs , or consider further education in a professional masters program .
In addition , the broad thin film materials experience gained from the project will be useful prepara-tion for student internships in the microelectronics industry and strengthening the workforce pool of educated BS/MS graduates for this critical industry .
*** This proposal focuses on the ecological and genetic impacts of the introduction of non-native rainbow trout ( Oncorhynchus mykiss ) on native gene pools of threatened Yellowstone cutthroat trout ( O. clarki bouvieri ) .
In addition to competition , predation and the introduction of disease organisms by introduced species , for some native fish species , a major threat is that of hybridization with the introduced species .
Hybrids , if fertile , can spread and cause the complete replacement of parental genes with those of the introduced species .
This study is designed to determine the extent of hybridization between Yellowstone cutthroat trout and rainbow trout as well as the degree of genetic dilution that has occurred in native gene pools .
In addition , the study will also test whether particular features of the environment ( temperature , elevation , stream flow , etc .
) are correlated with the presence or absence of pure species or hybrids .
In this manner , the study will determine if particular environments favor the spread of hybrid fishes , or provide an advantage to the remaining pure populations of Yellowstone cutthroat trout.This study will provide the first documentation of the pattern of genetic invasion of rainbow trout and begin to explore the ecological mechanisms that are responsible for this pattern .
If environmental correlates are found which predict the success of native Yellowstone cutthroat trout over hybrids , such habitats can be given top priority for conservation .
Only through a combined approach of understanding both the ecological and genetic factors that influence the success of invasive species , can we ever hope to deter their spread and save native gene pools SES 0211011The Many Foundations of Newtonian DynamicsLawrence Sklar , University of MichiganFrom its earliest days Newtonian dynamics has been formulated in terms of a variety of foundational principles .
The initial varied foundations proliferated in the 18th and 19th centuries , and this variety of possible foundational versions of the theory was augmented by a number of important additional reconstructions of the theory 's first principles in the 20th century .
Some of these alternative foundations of the theory were motivated by considerations of mathematical simplicity or elegance , or were generated primarily out of the desire to find versions of the theory particularly suitable for problem solving in novel ranges of applications of the theory .
But a number of the alternative foundations were strongly motivated by the desire to provide resources that would help resolve long-standing interpretive issues with the theory .
This project provides some discussion of the historical development of the panoply of alternative foundations for the theory .
The primary goal of the research , however , is to explore a number of philosophical , methodological and interpretive issues that reveal how the possibility of alternative reconstructions of the theory plays its role in ongoing interpretive debates .
The PI focuses on a number of foundational structures for the theory , including contemporary axiomatizations , contemporary Machian versions of the theory , and versions of the theory that rely on using spacetime concepts from relativistic theories , to reconstruct Newtonian dynamics and gravitational theory , and contemporary foundations based on extremal principles .
Three specific issues are to be treated .
First , exponents of alternative axiomatizations of Newtonian dynamics have taken deeply opposed attitudes toward the concept of force in the theory .
Is force an uneliminable component of the ontology required by the theory , or can its place be given a completely representationalist account ?
How do the new axiomatic reconstructions play into the ( very old ) debate ?
Second , three separate foundational reconstructions can play important roles in the famous debates about the nature of space and time , debates reaching back to the controversy between Leibniz and Newton at the very beginnings of the theory .
Structuralist axiomatizations provide a newly coherent approach to a representationalist version of the theory that can be used both by substantivalists and relationists to back up their claims .
Third , the spacetime versions of the theory relying on apparatus retro-fitted to the theory from special and general relativity provide a new context in which the old ontological debate can gain new insights .
Contemporary Machianism provides , perhaps , the version of the theory most suited to the relationist .
But its nature and its relation to the orthodox theory opens up many interesting questions about what it is to iointerpretli a foundational theory.Contemporary formalizations of the theory that ground it in an extremal principle allow us new insights into the question of the legitimacy of such modes of explanation as fundamental to a theory , rather than as mere derivatives from a causal mode of explanation .
Mislove , 0211217 NSF supported a Special Session on Hybrid Systems as part of the Eighteenth Workshop on the Mathematical Foundations of Programming Semantics ( MFPS 18 ) , March 20-25 , 2002 at Tulane University .
This meeting was also held concurrently with the Clifford Lectures of the Mathematics Department at Tulane University , which focused on mathematical logic and computer science .
Research in areas relevant to MFPS focus in theoretical computer science , programming semantics , including domain theory , logics such as temporal logic and linear logic , applications of category theory to semantics , and non-standard set theories .
The Special Session on Hybrid Systems included an invited address and talks on special topics in hybrid systems .
NSF funds supported this session , which enabled the participation of the keynote and invited speakers , and enabled widened opportunity for participation and inclusion of graduate students .
Ethylene is an unique plant signaling molecule .
The hydrocarbon gas , known as the fruit ripening hormone , controls many aspects of plant growth and development .
It is biosynthesized from methionine via a three-step enzymatic process SAM ACC ACC Methionine SAM ACC C2H4 .
Synthase synthase oxidaseIts synthesis is highly regulated .
Experimental evidence accumulated over the last 10 years indicates that one of the key enzymes in the ethylene biosynthetic pathway , 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid ( ACC ) synthase ( ACS ) , is encoded by a highly divergent multigene family in various mono- and dicotyledonous plants .
The completion of the Arabidopsis genome sequence reveals the presence of 10 putative ACS genes ( ACS2 , 4-12 ) and two pseudogenes ( ACS1 , ACS3 ) .
Expression studies reveal that the family members are differentially regulated by various inducers and developmental stages Studies on the regulation of the ACS genes in Arabidopsis are proposed here to gain insight into the details of the signaling machinery involved primarily in the regulation of the ACS gene by auxin and ethylene .
Further studies are proposed to obtain knowledge regarding the structure and the biochemical properties of the ACS isoenzymes .
The proposed molecular and biochemical experimental approaches attempt to answer the following question why are there 10 ACC synthase isoenzymes in Arabidopsis for the synthesis of the ethylene precursor ACC ?
While all of them have the same biochemical function , the question arises whether they have distinct or redundant biological function .
The findings have the potential to allow a fundamental understanding of the role of multigene families in plants , a hallmark finding of the Arabidopsis Genome Sequencing project .
EIA 0211008Sabelli , NoraSRI InternationalTitle The Link Between Information Technology Research and Education , Teaching and LearningThe principal investigator ( PI ) of this proposal is seeking support for an event in early March 2002 that is a combination of a principal investigator 's meeting for ITR awardees and a workshop for senior researchers and young investigators in learning technologies .
The purpose of the event is to reflect upon the experiences , culture , and community of research in the learning technologies to develop ideas that would inform a CISE-focused learning technology initiative in FY 2002.Conversations with and observations of many recent ITR , CRLT , LIS , and KDI awardees have revealed that there is a kind of tacit knowledge involved in building communities of researchers and practitioners in the emerging learning technology field .
Often , such tacit knowledge becomes apparent as a project matures and thus its study and capture may be unjustified at the time of proposal submission .
Since learning technology has such strong practical threads , tacit knowledge gained from theory building and research should inform practice to reduce the time required for research and theories to find their way into real-world learning environments.There is reason to believe that the event as proposed will offer a much needed venue to discuss this tacit knowledge and the role CISE should have in expanding research and practice in learning technology .
Collaboration , reflection and introspection , diversity of stakeholders , and long-term sustainability are some of the topics expected to be explored within the contexts of simulation , visualization , and modeling ; distance and online learning ; embedding learning assessment and analyzing learner data ; cultural , cognitive , and social dynamics ; and virtual laboratories and remote instrumentation.I strongly recommend that the proposal be funded the level of $ 125,000 .
One plant genome , Arabidopsis , has been sequenced , and a second one , rice , is nearing completion .
These plant species represent the major taxonomic division of the plant kingdom and include the first major crop .
Rice is also a member of the cereals that include crops like wheat and maize , which are much larger in genome size , 35-times and 5-times , respectively , and , therefore , more difficult to sequence .
However , since maize is a major crop in agriculture and a significant factor to the economy of the United States , sequencing its genome will provide a critical infrastructure to advance food supply , quality , and safety , with simultaneous reduction of risk to health by chemical pollution .
To enable sequencing the larger maize genome , this project seeks to provide sets of overlapping cloned DNA fragments , about 150 kb in size that are placed on the genetic map of maize .
This placement will be greatly facilitated by zip code-like sequences of these cloned DNA fragments .
These zip codes are in particular valuable since a certain percentage is conserved in sequence and order between maize and the closely related rice genome ( synteny ) .
Since the rice genome sequence is aligned to the rice genetic map , ordering the sets of overlapping maize DNA fragments will be greatly enhanced in regions of synteny .
The resulting map of DNA fragments will be used to generate contiguous genomic sequence .
This will show whether the larger size of the maize genome , largely due to non-genic , repeat sequences , will require a different method for obtaining the gene content of maize .
A few examples of long stretches of maize genomic DNA provide biologists for the first time information about the variability in gene density and a correlation of the genetic and physical map over several centiMorgans .
Such genetic distances are already long enough to demonstrate to breeders how genes are discovered based on linkage of traits to DNA .
This award by the Inorganic , Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program supports research by Professor Kirk S. Schanze of the University of Florida to pursue studies on the Photophysics of Metal-Organic and Organometallic pi-Conjugated Oligomers .
Pi-conjugated polymers and oligomers comprise a new generation of molecular materials with technologically useful optical , electronic , and opto-electronic properties .
Research is underway to investigate the excited state properties of mono-disperse pi-conjugated oligomers that contain transition metal chromophores to gain a molecular level understanding of their excited state properties .
Objectives include an understanding of how transition metal chromophores modify the excited state properties of the pi-conjugated organic systems and how the pi-conjugated molecules modify the excited state properties of the metal complexes , particularly the properties of the triplet-pi , pi* manifold of the conjugated oligomer .
Metal ion complexes involved in metal-to-ligand charge transfer ( MLCT ) excited states include Ru ( II ) , Os ( II ) and Rh ( III ) with alpha-thiophene oligomers that modulate the energy gap between the MLCT and triplet-pi , pi* manifolds in both mono- and polynuclear complexes .
The excited state properties of platinum-acetylide oligomers will be examined to provide clear information concerning the spatial extent of the singlet-pi , pi* and triplet-pi , pi* excitons and to understand how inter-chain interactions modify the excited state properties of the pi-conjugated Pt-acetylides.The photochemistry of pi-conjugated molecules attached to transition metal ions are being investigated as to their basic photophysical properties with applications that include novel electronic light-emitting devices , light-to electrical energy conversion , laser light protection , and plastic electronic circuits .
This Small Business Innovation Research ( SBIR ) Phase I project focuses on the implementation of a Terahertz ( THz ) module that can emit coherent and tunable Terahertz waves .
This project naturally follows the recent result obtained by the Project Investigator .
Recently , coherent Terahertz radiation was generated at room temperature , which could be continuously tunable from 56.8 mm to beyond 1618 mm ( 5.27 to 0.18 THz ) , in Gallium Selenide , based on difference-frequency generation .
The peak Terahertz power can be as high as 69.4 W at 196 mm .
The corresponding photon conversion efficiency reaches 3.3 % .
This value has been greatly improved owing to the combination of extremely low absorption coefficients in the Terahertz domain and a large second-order nonlinear coefficient for Gallium Selenide .
On the other hand , it has been demonstrated that optical parametric oscillator in Lithium Niobate can be used to generate a Terahertz wave tunable in the range of 110-460 m ( 2.7-0.7 THz ) with a peak power of 300 W. However , Lithium Niobate suffers from photorefractive damage .
One needs a much higher laser intensity to achieve parametric oscillation .
The Terahertz source will dramatically impact molecular spectroscopy .
Such an instrument can be eventually used to control pollution and to identify toxic chemicals , for remote sensing , bio- medical imaging , and security screening .
In this project , funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division , Sinha will conduct research on unimolecular reactions that deviate from the traditional description by the RRKM statistical theory .
Gas phase molecules are prepared in selected ro-vibrational states above the dissociation limit of the ground electronic state by double resonance excitation .
These excited molecules revert to lower energies , dissociate at a given rate , and present a final product state distribution .
The resonance energy and the line widths provide information about the potential energy surface , whereas the final product state distribution reflects the dynamics of the system as it evolves from the transition state to the products .
Systems to be investigated include hypochlorous acid , pernitric acid , and methyliodide , as these are believed to exhibit non-statistical reaction dynamics.This research deals with fundamental aspects of chemical reactions in the gas phase .
Whereas many reactions can be described by a statistical theory , there are some for which a statistical theory of reactions does not apply .
This research is focused on the reaction dynamics of several molecular species for which non-statistical behavior is suspected .
The results of this work will add to the fundamental understanding of reaction chemistry , and may be applicable to problems of atmospheric and combustion chemistry .
Students will participate in this research and thereby acquire knowledge and skills in preparation for entry into the scientific/technical workforce .
Knowledge of tropical biota and ecosystems has expanded greatly in recent years .
At the same time , the scope of tropical biology has also broadened to include social and economic dimensions of land use change and habitat loss .
Tropical biologists have also started to make policy inputs to conservation and management of ecosystems .
The Association for Tropical Biology ( ATB ) , in collaboration with other organizations , has planned a process to articulate and prioritize research in tropical biology .
The goals of the process are to review recent developments in tropical biology and to define priorities for future research .
This workshop award will support participation of U.S. scientists , including graduate students , to attend a major international conference , the Annual Meeting of the ATB in Panama in July , 2002 .
This conference will be attended by natural and social scientists as well as policy makers .
The participation of U.S. scientists will benefit U.S. scientists and those from tropical countries to promote scientific collaboration in the short- and long-term .
Three mechanisms that promote the persistence of populations in uncertain environments are 1 ) a variable age at maturation , 2 ) repeated reproduction , and 3 ) dispersal between populations .
The project will study 18 amphibian species that breed in a complex of 32 natural sinkhole ponds .
All individuals of 7 species are photographed whenever they are captured .
Computer-assisted matching of these images yields data for capture-recapture models to estimate population sizes and vital rates .
These estimates will allow direct evaluation of population dynamics and persistence in uncertain environments under realistic assumptions .
The detailed model for the most common focal species , Ambystoma opacum , will guide construction of an individual-based model for Ambystoma tigrinum , a species listed as endangered in several states .
Population dynamics in spatially and temporally varying environments comprise an important area of population biology because they determine the context of life history adaptation and population differentiation .
This study is also important because population ecology is the foundation for community ecology and for the development of plans for managing populations for harvest , pest control , or conservation action.The request for imaging equipment is supported within this award as part of NSF 's Facilitation Awards for Scientists and Engineers with Disabilities , a funding mechanism that enables scientists with disabilities to more fully engage in the research process .
The project will support doctoral and post-doctoral research .
Undergraduates will be employed as field assistants during the summer .
This dissertation investigates how gender-based asylum policies have developed and been administered by the Immigration and Naturalization Service ( INS ) .
In 1995 the INS created a category of gender-specific types of persecution .
Examples of gender-based persecution are rape , sexual abuse , genital mutilation , forced marriage , forced sterilization , and domestic violence .
The United States is one of only three nations to implement a 1991 United Nations call to recognize gender-based persecution .
The history and administration of this policy will be investigated by interviews with INS officials , administrative hearing officers , immigration attorneys , Non-Governmental Organizations ( NGOs ) , human rights activists , and asylum seekers .
Observation of hearings and NGO meetings will also provide information on how the policy is being implemented .
In addition , archival materials such as INS and UN documents , attorney case files , and NGO reports will provide background information on the history of the policy and its administration .
Li0211614 The goal of this project is to develop mathematical theoryregarding biodiversity in the context of resource competition.Recent numerical work suggests that competition for multipleresources can generate periodic oscillations or even chaoticoscillations , and a large number of species can coexist on veryfew limiting resources .
However , both mathematicians andecologists still lack analytic understanding of mechanisms thatgenerate diversity in ecological communities .
The investigatorstudies several resource competition models , including standardcompetition models with multiple resources and competition modelswithin food webs ; he gives rigorous analysis for the models andprovides insight into diversity of competing species .
Theory ofdifferential equations and theory of dynamical systems are usedto determine the long-term behavior of solutions of the models inthe form of attracting steady states , limiting cycles or strangeattractors .
Important issues are what causes competing species tocoexist , and locating parameter ranges in which coexistenceoccurs .
The question of the maintenance of species diversity innatural systems has intrigued mathematicians and ecologists for avery long time .
This work provides a general understanding offactors affecting abundance and biodiversity .
The results haveimportant implications for determining the patterns of speciescomposition in aquatic and terrestrial systems , and for managingnatural resources such as forests and lakes .
Landscape heterogeneity , patch connectivity , and host-parasitoid population dynamicsNSF Ecological Studies Grant ( DEB-0211359 ) September 1 , 2002 - August 31 , 2005 The fragmentation and loss of natural habitats is a dire world-wide problem .
Ecologists have made significant in-roads toward understanding the impact that increased habitat fragmentation or spatial patchiness might have on the long-term persistence of predator-prey populations .
However , most fragmentation studies have disregarded the vegetational cover that exists between patches ( known as the matrix ) , generally assuming that the matrix is featureless and neutral to the movements and population fluctuations of both predator and prey species .
In reality , the matrix is complex and ever-changing .
Any alteration in matrix composition may significantly impact how predators interact with their prey .
This proposal outlines a course of study designed to address how different matrix types influence the movement and population fluctuations of an herbivore and its predator .
The planthopper , Prokelisia crocea , and the parasitoid wasp , Anagrus columbi , which are distributed among discrete patches of prairie cordgrass in the Great Plains of the United States form an ideal system for this type of study .
The crux of this proposal is a relatively large-scale field experiment that is designed to alter the ability of planthoppers and wasps to move among patches ( i.e. , patch connectivity ) by embedding cordgrass patches in either of two dominant matrix types ( mudflat or the exotic grass species brome ) .
Emigration , immigration , the pattern of spatial spread , and the within-patch distribution of insects will be assessed from the recapture of fluorescent-marked individuals .
The experiment also will be carried out over 3 spatial scales and 6 generations to provide information on the effect of the matrix manipulation on parasitism and density fluctuations among patches and over time .
Never before has the patch structure and matrix been manipulated in predator-prey population studies in the field .
As a complement to this field experiment , trials will also be conducted to determine the behavioral basis for matrix-dependent movement patterns of the planthopper and wasp .
Finally , based on information derived in the above studies , a simulation model will be developed with the goal of evaluating the impact of habitat fragmentation and degradation ( e.g. , changes in the landscape matrix ) on the long-term persistence of predator-prey interactions .
Results from this renewal of NSF grant DEB-9973789 should provide critical and much needed information on the effects of heterogeneous landscapes on predator-prey interactions , and hopefully catalyze a broader approach to studies of predator-prey interactions .
This research also has broad ramifications for conservation programs that are interested in the connectivity of reserves a matrix that facilitates dispersal ( i.e. , a high-quality matrix ) may serve a function identical to that of stepping stones or corridors .
Finally , this research may have a direct bearing on the success of pest management programs that employ strategies that purposely modify the matrix ( e.g. , through inter-cropping , terracing , or leaving some fields fallow ) .
Knowledge of the effect of these changes on pest and natural enemy movement and interactions may be critical to developing a successful pest-control program .
Plant cell walls play crucial roles in the development of plants , their resistance to diseases , and communication between cells .
A fundamental understanding of cell wall biosynthesis has potential practical applications , including the development of crops plants better able to fend off pathogens and of plants that provide enhanced nutritional attributes or new polymer products for various industrial uses .
This project is aimed at understanding how hemicellulosic polysaccharides , a particular class of polymers found in plant cell walls , are synthesized .
Cell wall biosynthesis requires hundreds of enzymes , but only a few of these proteins and the genes that encode them have been identified and characterized .
Through strategies employing the tools of genomics , proteomics and bioinformatics , the principal investigators will identify candidate genes involved in the synthesis of plant cell walls and evaluate their function .
The studies will be conducted in three plant systems cotton fiber cells during a period of development in which large quantities of primary cell wall components are manufactured ; developing nasturtium seeds that store large quantities of xyloglucan , a major cell wall component ; and rice tissues undergoing rapid growth .
Rice is chosen as one of the plant systems because the recent completion of the rice genome sequence will aid in matching the proteins linked to cell wall biosynthesis with their respective gene sequences .
The principal investigators expect to identify genes involved in many aspects of cell wall biosynthesis and will make their results and resources freely available to researchers in the plant biology community .
The project will provide valuable training for undergraduates , graduate students , and postdoctoral research associates .
It will also provide summer laboratory experiences for underrepresented students .
0211430Smouse Changes to natural landscapes can have profound effects on population densities and spatial distributions of organisms , greatly modifying natural breeding patterns .
Two novel genetic analyses will examine spatial and temporal variation in the breeding patterns of natural and human-modified populations of the tropical dry-forest tree , Enterolobium cyclocarpum , located in Guanacaste Province , Costa Rica .
The availability of seed collections dating from 1995 provides a unique temporal dimension to these analyses .
Studies of the pollination ecology of this species will supplement the genetic analyses allowing more informed interpretations of the genetic data.This research has several broader impacts .
First , it will determine if human-induced habitat modifications significantly modify breeding patterns of tropical trees to such an extent that natural levels of genetic diversity ca n't be maintained .
Second , temporal analyses will demonstrate whether studies of a few reproductive events adequately describe breeding patterns of a long-lived tree .
These comprehensive studies should also assist the development of effective landscape management plans that consider the spatial extent of natural breeding populations .
Finally , comparisons of the two genetic analyses should determine whether the less resource-demanding approach dependably estimates breeding parameters .
If so , this could provide a major breakthrough for landscape-level studies of pollen movement patterns in a wide variety of plant species .
ABSTRACT0211772Sit , William Y.CUNY City CollegeThe proposers will organize the East Coast Computer Algebra Day ( ECCAD ) , which is aone-day regional conference on computer algebra , its applications and related technologicaldevelopments .
ECCAD has been held annually at a variety of North American locations onthe East Coast since 1994 .
The ninth meeting in the series will be held on Saturday , May 18,2002 , at LaGuardia Community College , Long Island City , New York .
The proposers willinvite three speakers for featured presentations , and organize contributed poster/softwaredemo sessions , covering the various aspects of computer algebra algorithms , software imple-mentation , and applications .
They expect about 70 to 100 researchers , post graduate and graduate students to participate , with most of the attendees coming from the North East , but also many from all over North America and even Europe.In addition to invitations to the many universities and institutions along the East Coast where significant research in symbolic computation is going on , the 2002 ECCAD will be made a ( separately funded ) part of the Faculty Development Program of The City University of New York ( a minority institution ) , and the proposers will specifically encourage faculty and students from all campuses of CUNY to participate .
The investigator studies systems with multiple interactingcomponents that together create rhythms .
The systems come fromneural , chemical , and gene regulatory contexts .
There are twomain themes .
The first is reduction of dimensions , investigatingthe circumstances under which large-dimensional models behavelike much lower-dimensional differential equations or maps .
Someof that work uses geometric singular perturbation theory toinvestigate how systems with multiple degrees of freedomcondense to essentially lower-dimensional systems , at leastlocally in phase space .
Another set of issues related toreduction of dimension concerns fast partial synchronization.The second theme concerns how interaction of many components in asystem can lead to the suppression of activity in some of thecomponents .
Two examples of this to be studied come from achemical pattern formation and neural systems , each with sometype of global inhibitory feedback .
Systems with many separate but interacting components arisein a large variety of applications , including biotechnology , chemical engineering , and neurobiology .
In general , such systemshave a large number of degrees of freedom , and are usuallyinvestigated by numerical simulation .
However , simulations alonedo not provide a deep understanding of why the systems behave theway they do , or how they can be manipulated .
Reductions ofequations to smaller systems can be very useful .
But without aprincipled way to do the reductions , one does not know how muchof the behavior of the large system is lost .
This projectconcerns methods to find such principled reductions , usingmathematical tools that enable one to investigate circumstancesunder which parts of the dynamics behave like that of systemswith a much smaller number of degrees of freedom .
Other tools tobe used allow one to understand how only some subset of thecomponents can be involved at a given time , even though allcomponents are coupled .
The methods are applied to problems fromneural , chemical and gene regulation systems .
The project alsoprovides interdisciplinary training opportunities for studentsand postdocs .
Cosner0211367 The investigators derive and analyze mathematical modelsthat describe how spatial aspects of the environment and the waysthat organisms utilize space and disperse through it influencethe dynamics of populations and the structure of ecologicalcommunities .
The underlying motivation for the project is to gaina better understanding of how spatial effects can threaten ormaintain biodiversity or affect interactions between importanttypes of organisms such as crops , pests , and biological controlagents .
The project is focused primarily on edge-mediatedeffects in habitat fragments and on the effects of nonrandomdispersal .
The main goal is to gain insight into the ways thatedge-mediated effects and dispersal behavior influence thepersistence or extinction of species .
Understanding edge-mediatedeffects is important because one of the most significant ways inwhich humans alter natural environments is by fragmentinghabitats and thus creating edges .
The investigators study manyspatial effects , including edge-mediated effects , viareaction-diffusion models .
However , reaction-diffusion modelsassume random dispersal , and the dispersal patterns of someorganisms are affected by behavioral responses to the presence ofprey , predators , or conspecifics .
Reaction-diffusion equationscannot capture those effects , so the investigators model themwith more general forms of quasilinear parabolic partialdifferential equations .
The investigators use methods andresults from the theory of partial differential equations , dynamical systems , and nonlinear functional analysis to developthe mathematical framework needed to analyze the models .
The investigators study mathematical models for the waysthat plant and animal populations are affected by the size andspatial structure of the environment they inhabit and by the waythey move or spread through the environment .
The goal of theproject is to gain a better theoretical understanding of howspatial effects influence the persistence or extinction ofpopulations .
The underlying motivation is to provide insightsinto the impact of spatial effects on biodiversity and oneconomically important organisms such as crops and pests .
Thepotential practical benefits of the project are improvements indecision making in areas such as land management , conservation , and urban planning .
Much of the project is focused on theeffects of habitat edges , because one of the main effects ofhuman activity on the environment is to divide it into fragmentsand create edges , for example by building roads .
Differentorganisms respond to edges in different ways ; for example , a newroad may isolate a population of one species of animals thatrefuse to cross it but may add to the mortality of anotherspecies of animals that do attempt to cross .
When populationinteractions such as predation by one species upon another arecombined with spatial effects , the results can be complex andsometimes counterintuitive .
To understand them the investigatorsderive mathematical equations that incorporate spatial effectsand population interactions and analyze those equations todetermine when they predict persistence of populations versuswhen they predict extinction .
To conduct the analysis theinvestigators use and develop various mathematical methods .
The instructional development program of the University of Washington provides a rich context for learning about the challenges that faculty face in efforts to enhance their teaching , and how to help faculty face these challenges .
This project will1 .
Document the unique instruction-related concerns/questions of engineering faculty and the types of responses that fulfill these concerns.2 .
Document the complexities associated with designing and executing instructional development services in the context of engineering.3 .
Document cultural factors important for engineering instructional development.4 .
Share this information with others interested in supporting faculty efforts to enhance/modify their teaching ( including campus level instructional developers , workshop designers , national reform groups , and even faculty themselves ) .We propose to take advantage of these opportunities through a combination of research and website development activities .
Specifically , we propose to conduct research on successful instructional development efforts through a combination of debriefing interviews and case study observations .
The results of this study will be available to engineering educators and other programs through an innovative user-centered website -the Engineering Teaching Source .
The content of the website will be derived from the insights gained from the debriefing interviews and case study observations .
The design of the website will emphasize multiple paths by which faculty / instructional developers can find information.Our proposed research will provide insight into the needs of faculty as they change their teaching practices and provides the engineering education community with this insight through the design and publication of the Engineering Teaching Source .
This work will benefit all who are interested in helping engineering faculty address teaching challenges , including instructional developers in campus-wide centers , those who create workshops for engineering faculty , those funding and running systematic reform efforts , and facultythemselves .
This work will complement the spectrum of efforts to enhance the teaching of engineering by focusing on the people most pivotal to the teaching - the faculty themselves .
With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation ( MRI ) Program , the Department of Chemistry at Yale University will acquire an Electron Paramagnetic Resonance ( EPR ) Spectrometer .
The new instrument will support the research of major users in the Chemistry , Chemical Engineering , and Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry Departments .
Some of the studies that will exploit this instrument include a ) EPR studies of photosystem II and Mn model complexes ; b ) site directed spin labeling studies of protein secondary structure ; c ) de novo design of metal ion binding sites in proteins ; d ) bioinorganic studies of actIV cyclase and transition metal uptake ; e ) characterization of metal oxide catalysts ; and f ) EPR studies of RNase P. An electron paramagnetic resonance ( EPR ) spectrometer is an instrument used to obtain information about the molecular and electronic structure of molecules .
It may also be used to obtain information about the lifetimes of free radicals which are often essential for the initiation of tumor growth and/or a variety of chemical reactions .
These studies will have an impact in a number of areas , in particular biological chemistry .
EAR-0215724KreutzThis award provides support to significantly enhance the elemental and isotopic analysis capabilities at the University of Maine through the acquisition of a high resolution inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer ( HR-ICP-MS ) .
The HR-ICP-MS will enable environmental scientists and students at UMaine , as well as other educational institutions and state agencies , to substantially broaden their interdisciplinary research interests far beyond the current possibilities .
Specifically , a state-of-the-art HR-ICP-MS will enable the PIs to 1 ) Dramatically expand our element concentration and element ratio analysis capabilities in aqueous matrices .
Existing UMaine research strengths in Quaternary science , environmental geochemistry , and marine biogeochemistry rely upon accurate elemental determinations at part-per-trillion and part-per-quadrillion levels .
Each of these programs requires the sensitivity and low detection limits offered by HR-ICP-MS to perform multi-elemental analyses without time-consuming pre-concentration protocols ; and 2 ) Perform rapid and highly precise elemental isotope ratio determinations , or constrain isotope ratios sufficiently for primary processes to be inferred .
Isotope measurements made with the HR-ICP-MS will be immediately used in several ongoing projects investigating pollutant source and transport , biogeochemical processes , and climate variability .
We will develop a HR-ICP-MS Facility in the Sawyer Environmental Research Center at UMaine for use as a regional resource .
We plan to acquire a Finnigan ELEMENT2 , the only commercially available high resolution single collector ICP-MS .
In addition to its primary research focus , the HR-ICP-MS will be used in a range of undergraduate and graduate programs at UMaine .
Integration of research and education will occur through graduate theses , undergraduate courses , and independent undergraduate research projects under the Honors Program and Capstone Experience program .
*** Under the direction of Dr. Richard K. Larson , Ms. Hiroko Yamakido will collect data for her doctoral dissertation .
Her research concerns dialect variation in Japanese , with focus on adjectival inflection .
She will study the variants spoken in seven prefectures that extend from northern to southern Japan , including Hokkaido , Fukushima ( or Niigata ) , Osaka , Kyoto , Hiroshima , Fukuoka , and Kagoshima .
The project 's core data will be gathered though oral interviews with native speakers , who will be consulted regarding the acceptability and range of meanings of example sentences and phrases involving adjectives .
The adjectives include those showing the amibuity in English examples like OLD friend ( which can mean 'aged friend ' or 'long-time friend ' ) , as well as adjectives found in contexts like resultatives ( Mary hammered the metal FLAT ) , causatives ( Mary made John HAPPY ) , adverbials ( Mary spoke QUICK-ly ) , and so-called secondary predicate constructions ( Mary ate the fish RAW ) .
Ms. Yamakido will also consult published sources available only in the relevant locales and several Japanese dialectologists .
The results of her fieldwork will bear on the nature of prenominal adjectives in Japanese whether they are projected into attributive structures ( like blue house ) or into relative clause structures ( like house that is blue ) .This research is significant both for theories of generative syntax and semantics generally , and for Japanese dialectology in particular .
It will not only advance understanding of Japanese grammar , and the relation between its morphological and syntactic forms ; it will also demonstrate the rich diversity within a small sector of the grammar and the importance of cross-dialectal comparison .
Support is provided to subsidize the participation of students in the Gordon Research Conference on Plasma Processing Science to be held in Tilton New Hampshire on July 21-26 , 2002 .
This Small Business Innovative Research ( SBIR ) Phase I project will address the critical need for a commercial rheo-meter that can be used to measure all three shear flow properties of a molten thermoplastic .
Currently available commercial rheo-meters can measure at best only two of the three independent shear flow properties , which are the viscosity , first normal stress difference ( N1 ) , and second normal stress difference ( N2 ) .
The objective of the proposed project is to demonstrate proof-of-principle for a novel rheo-meter plate with monolithically integrated miniature pressure sensors fabricated using micro-electro-mechanical systems technology .
It will be shown that this novel rheo-meter plate can be used to extend the capabilities of conventional rheo-meters , enabling measurement of all three shear flow properties with greater accuracy than previously possible.The innovative rheo-meter plate will allow smaller sample sizes to be used , with greater control over sample thickness during testing and should lead to better design and control of manufacturing processes with polymeric materials and spectrometers .
EAR-0215565Simon M. PeacockMost of the world 's earthquakes occur in subduction zones where oceanic lithosphere descends into the mantle .
Intermediate-depth earthquakes , which occur at 40-300 km depth , and the transport of water into the mantle are intimately linked to metamorphic reactions in the subducting lithosphere .
The researchers propose to better understand subduction-zone processes by integrating seismological observations with thermal and petrological models .
In order to test the dehydration-embrittlement hypothesis for intermediate-depth seismicity , the investigators will construct two-dimensional kinematic-dynamical thermal models for a set of subduction zones that span a range in subduction parameters and that include regions with significant along-strike variations in observed seismicity .
Events in global and regional seismicity data sets will be systematical evaluated and relocated in order to test the hypotheses that ( a ) upper seismic zones are confined to the subducting mafic crust , ( b ) lower seismic zones are related to dehydration reactions in the subducting mantle , and ( c ) the forearc mantle is aseismic .
Petrologic models of subducting lithosphere will be created using new phase diagrams and rock property data bases and the resulting layered seismic-velocity models will be tested against observed dispersion of seismic body waves .
The amount and distribution of forearc mantle hydration ( serpentinization ) will be quantified by integrating seismological observations with mineral physics calculations .
This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes to develop grafted tomato transplants for greenhouse and field applications in the USA .
Genetic-based sources of resistance to soil-borne pathogens and pests are currently being used as the rootstocks for grafted tomatoes in Southern Europe , Asia and Australia .
In these countries , vegetable production is being impacted by the elimination of methyl bromide .
Biological control strategies , such as grafting , will have increasing value in the USA as disease profiles and chemical pesticide regulations change .
This research will demonstrate the production of high quality greenhouse bench grafts using rootstocks with disease resistance .
The commercial applications of this project are in the field of agriculture .
This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project concerns the development of a multi-channel fluorescence lifetime measuring instrument using a novel low-cost digitizer .
The key to bringing the well-known utility of fluorescence lifetime measurements to the masses is to have a low-cost instrument with excellent speed and accuracy .
This work will pioneer a measuring technique that , by taking advantage of recent developments in lasers , goes a long way toward meeting the needs of such an instrument .
However , there is one vital component , the digitizer that presently accounts for more than half of the cost.Commercially available digitizers do not match the needs of the application and are therefore too expensive or lack essential capabilities .
However , This work has found a unique custom ASIC that appears to be a good match .
This ASIC is a waveform digitizer developed at Berkeley National Laboratory for the AMANDA neutrino telescope .
This work will prototype and characterizes a multi-channel fluorescence lifetime measuring instrument that uses this ASIC as the digitizer .
If the phase I objectives are achieved , this work will be able to build exceptionally affordable instruments that can enable and greatly expand the use of fluorescence lifetime measurements in a vast range of applications .
Under the SCREMS program , the Department of Mathematicsat the College of William & Mary will purchase equipmentfor the creation of a computing network dedicated to thesupport of research in the mathematical sciences .
Theaward will provide funds for high-bandwidth networkingequipment , high-performance computers for numericalcalculations , and a file server .
This equipment , togetherwith desktop machines providing platforms for smallercomputations , will provide a numerical/file server clusterfor the faculty investigators and students working on anumber of research projects .
This equipment will be usedfor computationally intensive research projects spanninga wide range of applied mathematics .
These includenumerical methods for engineering design , numericalmathematics , computational biochemistry , and operationsresearch .
The projects specifically included in the grantare ( 1 ) Efficient approaches to the optimization of systemsgoverned by partial differential equations , ( 2 ) distanceparameterized methods for molecular conformation , ( 3 ) aparallel Hessenberg QR eigenvalue algorithm , and ( 4 ) thecalculation of the exact distribution of the time totraverse a stochastic activity network and the eliminationof resampling error in bootstrapping .
PI Leemis and two former doctoral students have writtenAPPL ( A Probability Programming Language ) .
This Maple-basedlanguage is used to compute probabilities and performoperations on random variables .
The size of many problemsthat can be solved by APPL is limited by computing speed.The speed offered by the hardware obtained as part of theSCREMS grant is crucial to solving problems of the magnitudeencountered in practice .
At some point in their lives , most people encounter stressful events that can have a major impact on the course and direction of their lives .
However , after decades of research , it is clear that many assumptions held in society about how individuals respond to life 's traumas have not survived empirical test .
For example , in contrast to widely held myths about the coping process , the data fail to demonstrate universal reactions to stressful life events .
Despite the popular belief that emotional and cognitive responses to stress follow a clear pattern , there is little empirical evidence for an orderly sequence of stages of response .
Understanding the general process of coping will be enhanced through examination of group and individual differences , as well as similarities , in response to a variety of negative life experiences.The principal investigator started a longitudinal investigation of early emotional , cognitive , and social responses to the terrorist attacks of September 11 , 2001 .
Using an anonymous Web-based survey methodology , stress and coping data were collected from a large nationally representative sample of adults and adolescent/parent dyads ( with an over-sampling from 4 cities that have experienced community-based trauma New York City , Oklahoma City , Miami , and Littleton , CO ) at 9-14 days , two months , and six months following September 11 .
This project continues the prospective study , following the sample with four specific aims 1 ) To investigate the psychological and social processes that help explain individual differences in response to a national traumatic event ; 2 ) To identify early predictors of long-term adjustment to both the 9/11 attacks and subsequent events that may occur ; 3 ) To compare responses to the 9/11 events among individuals who have previously experienced a traumatic event ( either personally or in their communities ) with those who have not previously encountered trauma ; and 4 ) To investigate prospectively the psychological and social processes that help explain variation in response to various stressful life events more generally.The unparalleled nationwide impact of the September 11th attacks , coupled with the large and representative nature of the existing national sample and the early collection of emotional , cognitive and social responses to these events , provides a remarkable opportunity to examine longitudinally how individuals and communities respond to stressful life events more generally .
Such an examination can be conducted without several specific methodological limitations that have plagued prior research ( e.g. , small or demographically homogenous samples ) .
Information collected in this effort can illuminate the coping process more generally so as to advance future conceptual work in this area .
Moreover , it can further the understanding of the unique needs of traumatized individuals and provide information to help identify individuals at risk for subsequent difficulties .
With these data in hand , educational and intervention efforts that are designed and implemented among health care professionals and the community at large can be better informed , more cost-effective and more sensitive to the needs of the populace .
This award is for acquisition of a new state-of-the-art scanning probe microscope ( SPM ) for the New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology research community .
The instrument is an atomic force microscope ( AFM ) that can be modified to operate in a variety of scanning modes , including phase-imaging microscopy , electric force microscopy , magnetic force microscopy ( MFM ) and scanning tunneling microscopy ( STM ) .
The principal investigators have successfully used AFM imaging to support their research on ceramic film fabrication and fluid interactions with geologic materials .
Other researchers will use the AFM for characterizing a variety of materials , including metal surfaces , nanocomposites , self-assembled monolayers , carbon nanotubes , buckyballs , and DNA .
The projects described herein involve some 14 faculty , several post-doctoral researchers , and many graduate students , from seven different academic departments at NMT .
The microscope will enhance graduate student training and undergraduate teaching through experience with one of the best surface characterization tools available .
% % % AFM detects surface topography by monitoring molecular force interactions between a probe tip and the sample .
STM detects surface topography by monitoring the tunneling current between an electrically conductive probe and the sample .
SPM offers resolution of surface features on the order of a few nanometers , the highest of any imaging technique .
An additional important advantage of SPM over other techniques is the ability to image samples in air or under liquids without extensive preparation .
Environmental and biological samples may be examined under near-natural conditions .
Instruction in SPM techniques will be integrated directly into existing graduate and undergraduate courses and into a new short course .
Budgeting for an instrument manager/trainer will ensure instrumentation access for those with little or no prior experience with SPM techniques .
With support from a National Science Foundation Major Research Instrumentation award , Dr. Richard Aslin and his colleagues at the University of Rochester will establish the Rochester Center for Brain Imaging ( RCBI ) .
The overall goal of this new center is to assess the plasticity of the adult and child brain as it adapts to altered and varied experiences .
One type of alteration is the loss of sensory input in a single modality ( e.g. , the loss of vision or hearing because of blindness or deafness ) .
Previous research at Rochester has shown that congenitally deaf individuals who use sign language do so with the same parts of the brain ( the left hemisphere ) that are usually used for spoken language , despite relying on the visual rather than the auditory modality .
Deaf individuals also have greater sensitivity to patterns of movement in the peripheral visual field because they rely more on signed language inputs delivered in the visual modality .
These patterns of brain plasticity are the result of altered sensory input during early development and have important implications for the brain 's ability to compensate for deprivation and injury , provided that it has time during early development to adapt to these unusual circumstances .
Similar mechanisms of plasticity may be present in adults as they learn a new task or compensate for brain injury .
The Rochester group will use functional magnetic resonance imaging ( fMRI ) to study both long-term ( developmental ) and short-term aspects of brain plasticity in adults , children , and non-human primates .
The research will provide important insights into the neural mechanisms of learning and plasticity and the keys to the brain 's ability to adapt to novel experiences.Working with a team of cognitive scientists and neuroscientists , as well as magnetic resonance physicists and image processing engineers , Dr. Aslin will supervise the purchase , installation , and operation of a 3 tesla ( T ) fMRI system designed to measure the microscopic changes in blood oxygen level that occur in localized regions of the brain as participants perform a variety of tasks .
This system , which is state-of-the-art in the field of human brain imaging , will provide a group of over 30 researchers from the University of Rochester and Cornell University ( 90 miles from Rochester ) with the capability to explore a variety of issues in human brain plasticity and recovery of function after natural deprivation , injury , or disease .
A key feature of the new center is a team of physicists and engineers who will develop new ways for fMRI to reveal even more fine-grained details about the functioning and visualization of the brain.This project is important for several reasons .
It will provide a first-class facility for non-invasive brain imaging to a group of researchers at Rochester who have already demonstrated their ability to conduct cutting-edge research in cognitive neuroscience .
The RCBI will also play a significant role in the training of future scientists by actively involving graduate and undergraduates students from the University of Rochester and Cornell University , as well as undergaduates from the State University of New York at Geneseo ( a non-Ph.D.-granting college located 30 miles from Rochester ) in state-of-the-art brain imaging research .
The new center provides an excellent vehicle to teach the principles of fMRI to a new generation of students who will become leaders in the field of cognitive neuroscience .
Funding from the National Science Foundation will support Dr. Geoffrey E. Braswell , Dr. Jennifer B.Braswell , and their colleagues for three seasons of archaeological research at Pusilha , a prehistoric Classic period ( A.D. 250-800 ) Maya population and political center located in southwestern Belize , Central America .
Their investigations will test current models of the political and economic integration of archaic states through the conjunctive study of hieroglyphic monuments , ceramic and lithic artifacts , and settlement patterns .
Phase 1 research will consist of block coverage survey of the 9 km2 that constitute the ancient urban , residential , and agricultural zones of the site .
Data from this phase will allow the mapping team to build a geographic data base to examine how natural resources influenced settlement patterns , and how different segments of the population were situated in regard to those resources .
Phase 2 investigations will consist of test-pitting operations in residential and special function groups that crosscut all periods of occupation and social status .
Artifacts gathered during Phase 2 will be used to study the level of economic integration of elites and commoners from a diachronic perspective , as well as interaction with much larger and more powerful polities - particularly Copan and Caracol - located to the southwest and northeast .
Phase 3 excavations will consist of horizontal stripping operations in areas thought to have been production zones .
Data gathered from these intensive excavations will enable the researchers to ( 1 ) obtain fine-grain temporal information linked to architectural strata ; ( 2 ) test models regarding production loci developed through the test-pitting research ; and ( 3 ) more fully answer questions about the economic integration of elite and commoner households .
Current with all three phases , projectmembers will document and analyze the large corpus of hieroglyphic monuments from Pusilha .
These monuments describe in great detail the founding of the site and its dynastic history , and hint that Pusilha -- for a time -- may have been absorbed by the expanding Copan state or hegemony .
Analyses of settlement patterns and artifact distribution , therefore , will afford thestudy of the economic effects of the political events discussed in the ancient texts .
This research will contribute most immediately to the understanding of local and regional political and economic processes in a largely unknown region of the southeastern Maya periphery .
More broadly , it will contribute new and refine existing models of organization , stability , and change in Maya society , and - by extension - will be of relevance to the study of archaic states throughout the world .
This Small Business Innovation Research ( SBIR ) Phase I project will utilize an innovative high output ultraviolet ( UV ) lithography 0.25 mm T-gate fabrication process to develop high yield and high throughput manufacturing of millimeter-wave monolithic integrated circuit ( MMIC ) transceivers on 6 substrates .
This effort will focus on ( 1 ) developing high quality 6 metamorphic wafers for high circuit yield ; ( 2 ) demonstrate a metamorphic field-effect transistor ( FET ) using a 0.25 mm T-gate ( non-E beam ) process , ( 3 ) select the key MMIC to combine for high performance transceiver functionality .
Successful completing of these objectives will serve as the basis for combining proven MMICs for the design and fabrication of Ka-band and E-Band transceivers .
The MMIC technology market has shown great potential for applications in telecommunications ( including radar-based systems ) .
Single function MMIC designs require expensive machining and packaging .
This effort should to a lower-cost transceiver for the $ 10 billion MMIC market .
This Small Business Innovation Research ( SBIR ) Phase II project is developing an advanced questions answering ( QA ) system with the use of innovative natural language processing ( NLP ) .
The specific areas addressed by this project are ( 1 ) a true open-domain , high precision QA system optimized for commercial deployment ; ( 2 ) distributed processing that provides an unprecedented QU system response time ; and ( 3 ) system management and reporting tools for real-time customer feedback.The final product will provide accurate and short answers to questions asked in plain English .
The need for this capability is widespread in companies , government agencies , and among individuals .
The users may be casual questioners who ask simple factual questions , consumers who look for specific product features and prices , research analysis that collect market , finance , or business information , or professional information analysts such as law enforcement officials searching for very specific information requiring considerable expertise .
With support from the Major Research Instrumentation ( MRI ) Program , the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at Kennesaw State University will acquire a UV-VIS scanning spectrometer .
Research will focus on the following studies a ) synthesis and characterization of novel monodisperse oligo ( p-phenylene vinylene ) s as models for poly ( p-phenylene vinylene ) s ; and b ) quantification of polymeric aluminum in water treatment coagulants .
Scanning UV-VIS spectroscopy is a workhouse in a modern chemical laboratory .
It is critical for the study of chemical reactions , as it enables the detection of ultraviolet or visible light-absorbing molecules .
These studies will have an impact in a variety of areas , especially environmental sciences and materials chemistry .
With National Science Foundation support , Dr. Douglas Parks and colleagues will conduct one year of linguistic research documenting South Band Pawnee , Skiri Pawnee , and Arikara .
These languages belong to the Caddoan language family spoken on the Great Plains from Texas to North Dakota .
Fluent speakers of these three languages are no longer living .
Most of the linguistic data included in the project were recorded by the PI between 1965 and 2001 .
There are two aspects of linguistic documentation in this project bilingual dictionaries and analyzed text collections ( the latter primarily traditional stories , such as myths and tales ) for each of the three languages .
These materials will be made available on the World Wide Web .
An integral aspect of the project is completion of software begun under a previous NSF grant .
That software facilitates the development of multimedia dictionaries and analyzed text collections in a single working environment.This project contributes to the long tradition in anthropology and linguistics of scientific documentation of American Indian languages .
Such study contributes to the understanding of linguistic diversity in human speech worldwide and to the understanding of the interrelationships and historical development of American Indian languages .
It also preserves a record of the fast disappearing Native American languages .
Since South Band Pawnee , Skiri Pawnee , and Arikara are closely related to one another , comparison among them will offer insights into the development of the Caddoan language family and , more generally , processes of language change .
Because these languages share exceptionally complex verb structures , their documentation will provide linguists with a large amount of new data for the theoretical study of language history and structure .
The software completed by this project will serve as a valuable tool to aid description and analysis of endangered languages worldwide .
Finally , the dictionaries and texts will provide critically needed resources for the three tribes in their efforts to revive and teach their native languages , and to perpetuate their cultures .
This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program funds a major enhancement of the capabilities for small-angle x-ray scattering ( SAXS ) located at Princeton University .
The award permits the acquisition of a point-focusing SAXS instrument , which will be shared principally amongst users at Princeton and the New Jersey Institute of Technology ( NJIT ) .
This instrument uses double-focusing mirror/monochromator optics to focus a substantial solid angle of x-radiation to a small spot in the detector plane .
This optical geometry provides access to the very small angles needed to characterize structures with size scales from 1-100 nm .
SAXS also has the important advantage of being readily adapted for in-situ measurements ; cells for operation at elevated temperature and a scanning calorimeter stage will be incorporated into the SAXS system .
Since this instrument permits detailed characterization of anisotropic specimens with structure on the nanoscale , it will support a range of research avenues where controlling the orientation of nanostructural features is the aim .
Projects at Princeton and NJIT which will this instrument will support are directed towards guided self-assembly of mesoporous silicates through applied electric fields ; templated crystallization in block copolymers ; new nanostructured organic/inorganic composites for proton exchange membrane fuel cells ; orientation of block copolymers and block copolymer/carbon nanotube composites ; and structure-property-processing relationships in crystalline polymer fibers and crystallizable ionomers .
The instrument will be used by researchers ranging from postdocs to undergraduates , from Princeton , NJIT , and elsewhere .
Moreover , the modular nature of the SAXS system encourages the design of new sample stages and modification of existing modules , thus allowing students the opportunity to gain valuable experience in instrument design. % % % This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program funds a major enhancement of the capabilities for small-angle x-ray scattering ( SAXS ) located at Princeton University .
SAXS is a powerful technique for characterizing nanostructured materials ( size scales from 1-100 nm ) , and fully complements existing electron and scanning probe microscopy facilities at Princeton .
The new SAXS instrument will be shared amongst users at Princeton and the New Jersey Institute of Technology ( NJIT ) and elsewhere in the study of organic , inorganic , and composite materials with applications as diverse as nanoporous filters , membranes for portable fuel cells , and biodegradable polymer fibers .
The state-of-the-art instrument will be incorporated into a facility with two existing SAXS systems ( of complementary , but more limited , capabilities ) .
Users will include postdoctoral researchers , graduate students , and undergraduates , the last of these through both undergraduate research and by utilizing the instrument in an undergraduate materials science laboratory course .
This Small Business Technology Transfer ( STTR ) Phase I project will develop the technology necessary to produce low-power , low-noise VLSI amplifiers for large-scale neural recording applications .
Although there are many emerging multi-electrode arrays for neuroscience and neuroprosthetic recording applications , these arrays are practically limited by wiring densities and percutaneous connections .
In order for chonic neural recording applications to achieve electrode densities in the 100 to 1000 electrode range , implantable amplifier , signal processing , and multiplexing circuitry will be required .
The existing VLSI technology available for microelectrode recording is inadequate to create implantable amplifier systems with this number of channels .
These types of implantable amplifier systems will also be necessary for emerging clinical neuroprosthetic applications that will require chronic recording from large numbers of neurons in the brain .
In this Phase I project , novel CMOS techniques will be developed for producing the necessary high-density , low-power amplifier elements .
In the follow on Phase II project , these techniques will be integrated and fully developed into implantable amplifier systems for neuroscience and neuroprosthetic research .
The commercial application of this project is in the area of biomedical device and instrumentation .
The implantable biopotential amplifier systems produced in this project will be directly marketed to neuroscience researchers for use with high-density microelectrode arrays .
The technology will also be used in the development of clinical neuroprosthetic applications .
A National Science Foundation Major Research Instrumentation award will allow the purchase a NanoSurf II Pro ( NanoFocus Corp ) white light confocal microscope for use in dental microwear analysis and other research activities at the University of Arkansas .
Dental microwear analysis is the study of microscopic use-wear patterns in teeth to infer diet .
The ability to reconstruct diet from dental microwear is important to both bioarcheologists and paleontologists because food preferences provide a key to understanding the biology and ecology of past peoples and fossil species.While dental microwear has been studied for many living and fossil groups , current techniques are stretched to their limits .
Microwear feature measurement error is high , and repeatability is low .
This both reduces the power to resolve diet-related differences within studies and limits the ability to compare results among studies .
Measurement errors stem from two problems .
1 ) The scanning electron microscope ( SEM ) used in most such studies is not ideal for microwear analysis .
Because the SEM forms an image by a complex interaction between a surface and an electron beam , different instrument settings can produce different images for a single surface .
2 ) Because a surface can have hundreds of microscopic scratches and pits with irregular and overlapping boundaries , it can be difficult to identify and measure those features.Drs .
Ungar , Brown and Walker will use the Nanosurf II Pro instrument to solve both problems .
This instrument creates a true rendering of a wear surface in 3-D to provide a repeatable , automated procedure to quantify patterns of wear .
The microscope measures z-values at fixed x , y intervals and calculates a series of attributes , such as roughness and anisotropy for a microwear surface .
This work is important because it will give researchers a new , more repeatable way to characterize dental microwear that should lead to new insights into the diets of past peoples and fossil species .
This NanoSurf II Pro will also be used by researchers and students in other disciplines on the campus of the University of Arkansas .
The combination of high resolution , long depth of field and large field of view of this instrument will allow new research in 1 ) plant pathology ( study of damaged leaves following insect predation ) ; 2 ) mechanical engineering ( study of impact of cutting tools and electronic packaging systems ) ; 3 ) chemistry ( measurement of patterned materials for lab-on-a-chip devices ) ; 4 ) biological engineering ( measurement and analysis of microorganisms for development of biosensors ) ; 5 ) food science ( assessment of effects of processing on food surface structure ) ; and 6 ) geosciences ( measurement and analysis of bedrock surface modifications due to weathering ) .
Limited research infrastructure at Arkansas ' universities contributes to a limited science and technology environment in the state .
Many students leave Arkansas for their education and employment , contributing to the fact that the state is last in the nation in percentage of its population with a college degree .
Access to state-of-the-art major research instrumentation , such as the NanoSurf II Pro , will contribute toward recruiting and training students from geographically underrepresented groups in a broad range of science and technology disciplines .
AbstractA grant has been awarded to Drs .
John T. Longino , Elizabeth M. Kutter , and Erik V. Thuesen at The Evergreen State College to acquire a variable-pressure scanning electron microscope , an inverted compound fluorescent microscope , and a stereomicroscope , including motorized drives and computer interfaces that allow remote operation over the internet .
The Instrumentation will be used In studies of tropical biodiversity , microbial processes in biofilms , and ecophysiology of marine zooplankton .
John Longino 's research focuses primarily on ants , here and in Costa Rica .
The variable-pressure scanning electron microscope and stereomicroscope equipment will be used to finish a taxonomic revision of the Costa Rican Crematogaster , one of the major genera of arboreal ants .
The products will be both traditional published work and image-rich identification guides on the web .
Elizabeth Kutter will use the fluorescent microscope to study phage infections of bacteria in biofilms - very widespread , elaborate communities of convoluted towers and fluid channels that are largely resistant to antibiotics and disinfectants .
Erik Thuesen is investigating the ability of gelatinous zooplankton to survive in low-oxygen environments .
He hypothesizes a facilitated diffusion mechanism which will be investigated using fluorescent microscopy to examine the distribution of mitochondria .
Science teaching at Evergreen is strongly research oriented .
Many Evergreen faculty members carry out research and teaching programs that rely substantially on microscopy , and their ability to expand and move in new directions will be greatly enhanced by these instruments .
In addition to the microscopy-intensive research of the P.I .
's , a number of other faculty involve their students actively in smaller-scale , locally-funded research projects and presentations , many of which involve sophisticated microscopy .
This includes research into harmful algal blooms , environmental microbiology and soil biology .
The instrumentation will also be used in ways beyond these specific research activities , attracting a broad range of students through exposure to exciting images and concepts and improving access for underrepresented groups of students , especially at our Tacoma campus , which serves a high proportion of inner city students .
The remote control capabilities will support serious research projects in bioremediation and microbiology already initiated at the Tacoma campus and expand microscope use from laboratory to classroom .
Teaching at Evergreen is also inherently and intentionally interdisciplinary , and the SEM and other microscopes will serve as foci for full-time programs integrating arts and sciences .
A theoretical investigation of atmospheric adjustment to generalized forcings will be carried out by the Principal Investigator .
Atmospheric adjustment is defined as the response of a moist compressible atmosphere to a prescribed forcing .
Immediately after an instantaneous forcing of arbitrary shape , the atmosphere will , in general , be in a state of geostrophic and hydrostatic imbalance .
The study of atmospheric adjustment describes the subsequent tendency of the air to achieve a state of geostrophic and hydrostatic balance .
It is an extension of the classic problem of geostrophic adjustment to include the effects of compressibility and to allow for nonhydrostatic and moist processes .
The forcings studied will be completely general and include momentum , mass , thermal , and moisture forcings .
The impact of the time scale of the forcing will also be assessed .
Thus , the research will provide insight into the fundamental workings of the atmosphere .
The solutions also will shed light on the dynamics of clouds , mesoscale convective systems , and other nonhydrostatic circulations driven by moist convection .
Although both heating and moistening correspond to an addition of buoyancy to the air mass , there is a fundamental difference .
An addition of heat can be transformed to other forms of energy that can be propagated away ; an addition of water must be conserved and can not be transformed ( in the absence of phase changes ) and propagated out of the system.A suite of linear problems will be used to examine the full effects of compressibility in the adjustment to generalized forcings .
Initial value and Fourier transform techniques will be used to solve for the linear time-dependent problems analytically .
The energetics will be examined and the partitioning of the energy between the acoustic , gravity , and Lamb modes and the balanced final state will be assessed .
These solutions provide a benchmark to test the dynamical cores of mesoscale , cloud , and forecasting models.These analytic solutions of the linearized adjustment problem will be supplemented by numerical investigations .
These numerical studies will address the effect of nonlinearities on the atmospheric response and enable solutions with a more realistic base-state atmosphere .
The research also will develop an anelastic model that eliminates the acoustic and Lamb waves .
This new model will be an advance over existing models in that it will conserve mass , moisture , and energy .
Numerical experiments will document the merits of these anelastic equations in comparison to the fully compressible equations .
Thus in addition to providing insight into the dynamics of the atmosphere the research will help to benchmark and develop nonhydrostatic models , which are the foundation for numerical weather forecast models .
It is expected that the introduction of conjugated cross-links between conjugated macromolecules can lead to macromolecular networks with most interesting optic and electronic characteristics .
However , the knowledge base regarding the synthesis and processing of well-defined materials with this structural motif is very limited .
Thus , a research program is proposed , which is focused on the design , synthesis and exploration of well-defined conjugated polymer networks .
The proposed research addresses the synthesis and investigation of different classes of polymeric materials , including poly ( p-phenylene ethynylene ) ( PPE_ and poly ( thiophene ) ( PT ) deriavatives , and various fields of potential applications .
The envisioned activities will be focused on organometallic hybrid materials in which metal-ligand interactions between the conjugated macromolecules and metals allow the controlled formation of conjugated cross-links .
This general framework is particularly attractive , since it readily permits synthetic access to the desired target materials through ligand-exchange reactions and also allows for adequated processing schemes .
On the one hand , it is intended to directly utilize functionalities that are integral part of the polymer backbones as binding sites , such as the ethynylene moieties comprised in the PPE .
The latter form stable complexes with a variety of metal centers , including Pt ( 0 ) and Pt ( 0 ) , which will form the conjugated cross-links .
On the other hand , it is envisioned to also integrate specific ligand sites into the conjugated polymer .
Bipyridine moieties , which are readily integrated into the polymers under consideration and from stable complexes with a variety of metal centers , represent an illustrative example .
Initially focusing on charge-transport characteristics , electrical conductivity and nonlinear optic response , it is planned to systematically investigate the influence which the cross-links exert on the electronic and photophysical properties of the novel materials.The research in this proposal contributes new and original ideas to the current international effort in the fields of chemistry , materials science , and physics of conjugated polymers .
It is anticipated that it will provide firm answers to the fundamental questions how conjugated cross-links can be conveniently introduced into these materials without compromising their processability , and how this structural motif can be employed to influence the material 's optic and electronic characteristics in a beneficial way .
Because of the exemplary and fundamental character , the research is expected to provide a broad intellectual basis for the future design , synthesis and application of functional materials with unusual and unique optic and electronic properties .
With the aim to develop innovative and stimulating curricula at undergraduate and graduate level and in an attempt to integrate research and education , the proposed research is complemented with a number of educational elements .
The latter are intimately related to the research activities of the PI and include the creation of undergraduate research opportunities , the development of a new cutting-edge course on photo- and electrofunctional polymers , and the development of a pioneering outreach program - the 'Polymer Science Days ' - which is implemented in collaboration with the Cleveland Museum of Natural History .
The proposed initiatives complement 'routine ' teaching assignments and address the development of innovative and stimulating curricula .
This MRI grant will be used to create a state-of-the-art experimental facility for dynamic measurement , modeling , diagnosis and control of transient automotive emissions .
Catalytic exhaust after-treatment systems play a key role in reducing automotive emissions , but to meet increasingly stringent legislated environmental targets , ( as specified in SULEV or OBD II for example ) , it is now necessary to incorporate their dynamic behavior within the on-board engine control and diagnostic system .
To measure and model these dynamics experimentally requires the state-of-the-art , dual-channel , fast-response gas analysis equipment .
The MRI grant will also be used to acquire a hardware/software system for data acquisition , and for rapid prototyping access to the engine management and diagnostic system , in order to be able to implement and test the algorithms developed .
It is believed that there are currently only four facilities worldwide ( within academia ) that have fast response gas analysis capability , one of which was constructed at the University of Sussex ( UK ) , by the principal investigator .
The interdisciplinarity inherent in a system which has an engine , electronic control , and the catalytic after-treatment elements is reflected in the cross-departmental team of investigators who come from the Mechanical , Chemical , and Electrical & Computer Engineering departments within the College of Engineering at Villanova University .
For each of these departments , the facility would strongly enhance the Undergraduate and Masters student exposure to the automotive industry in a geographic area , which is weak in this regard .
The facility will be a regional resource , and is supported by Drexel and Temple Universities as well as local industry .
Industrial support and cost share comes from a broad cross-section of the automotive industry including end user Ford Motor Company , international automotive consultants Ricardo Inc. , locally based consultants , Environex , and local catalyst manufacturer Johnson Matthey .
With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation ( MRI ) Program , the Department of Chemistry at Saint John 's University will acquire a liquid chromatograph with mass spectrometric detection , including atmospheric pressure chemical ionization and electrospray probes .
This equipment will enhance research in a number of areas including a ) isolation of bioactive natural products ; b ) quantification of pesticides and pesticide residues in the Sauk River watershed ; c ) analysis of biological mechanisms for drug resistance ; d ) modeling a trinuclear site in multicopper oxidases ; e ) oxidized LDL studies ; f ) DNA repair in Saccharomyces cerevisiae ; g ) identification of endothelial proteins involved in tight junction formation ; and h ) vitamin K status in female athletes .
Liquid chromatography with mass spectrometric detection ( LC-MS ) is an extremely powerful technique used for the separation and analysis of complex mixtures .
It has become almost indispensable in industry ; therefore , it will be crucial in the preparation of students for careers in industry or graduate school .
This instrument will also be used by students at the College of Saint Benedict ( an all women 's college ) and students at Saint Cloud State University .
This Small Business Innovation Research ( SBIR ) Phase I project is to establish metabolic engineering approaches to increase the production of commercially relevant terpenoids in mint .
This program will be directed toward high priority areas that will allow U.S. mint growers and processors to become more competitive in the production of existing products such as menthol , as well as the ability to produce novel high value compounds .
The specific objectives include biochemical profiling of terpenoids in 150 different mint varieties , production of tissue-specific cDNA libraries and generation of 15,000 Expressed Sequence Tags ( ESTs ) , development of a mint DNA microarray and the use of this array to investigate gene expression patterns during trichome development , determination of protein function for one putative terpenoid biosynthetic enzyme , and improvement of mint transformation efficiency to the range of 50-100 percent .
Completion of these objectives will provide a basis for the development of a robust system for metabolic engineering in mint that will allow the creation of improved lines that have enhanced production of commercially relevant terpenoids .
This endeavor will create new products for U.S. mint producers and enhance their competitiveness in the world market.The commercial application of this project is in the area of high value , plant derived compounds .
This Major Research Instrumentation RUI grant supports instrumentation for research in ultrafast optics and semiconductor physics as well as undergraduate research training at Macalester College .
The instrumentation is a 7 Tessa superconducting magnet cryostat with optical access .
Initial research will use the instrument to support a NSF-funded program to study spin and charge dynamics in semiconductors .
The Projects include ultrafast THz spectroscopy of spin-dynamics in semiconductors ; time-resolved measurements of magneto-plasma oscillations in semiconductors ; and quantum transitions in strongly driven semiconductor quantum wells and heterostructures .
The PI is building an ultrafast THz system with spectral bandwidth of 0-30 THz at Macalester College .
This acquisition will significantly strengthen the capabilities of the system , permitting investigation of spin phenomena and other magnetic phenomena .
The research projects have a common objective of providing education and research training opportunities for advanced undergraduate students and will permit hands-on training in photonics and experimental materials physics .
Student research training will also be enhanced through use of the instrument in advanced courses , independent projects and senior honors projects .
As the switching rates in electronic devices are pushed to ever-higher frequencies , it becomes increasingly important to understand carrier transport phenomena in semiconductors on picosecond and femtosecond time-scales .
Using ultrafast terahertz spectroscopy it is possible to impulsively excite a semiconductor with a femtosecond optical pulse or single-cycle electromagnetic pulse and record the resulting motion of charge in time .
This allows the study of semiclassical phenomena such as carrier scattering and charge oscillations in semiconductors and semiconductor heterostructures on time-scales , which will be crucial to future devices .
In addition , this technique is well suited to the study of quantum phenomena such as electronic transitions in semiconductor quantum wells and heterostructures ( intersubband transitions ) and spin transitions .
Intersubband transitions are of interest for quantum coherent electronics and for the development of mid- and far-infrared semiconductor lasers .
Spin-transport devices in which an electron 's spin , rather than its charge , is used to control transport are of intense current interest .
Among the most promising systems are quantum wells in narrow-gap semiconductors .
This research will develop theoretical and computational approaches for characterizing efficient social insurance institutions .
We define a social insurance institution as a compulsory government-run program that provides a set of state-contingent taxes ( premiums or contributions ) and transfers ( benefits ) that cover a well-defined set of risks .
An efficient social insurance institution is one that provides a given level welfare to the individuals in the system at minimal cost .
Our research will attempt to provide characterizations of efficient social insurance institutions that cover the following risks 1 ) longevity , via mandatory pensions or old age insurance , 2 ) disability , via disability insurance , 3 ) unemployment , via unemployment insurance , and 4 ) health care costs , via medical insurance .
Another objective of social insurance is lifetime redistribution of income and/or wealth .
This can be viewed as insurance for a fifth class of risks , namely insurance for individuals who have certain fixed characteristics or types that may lead to permanently lower lifetime employment , earnings , wealth , and welfare.Social insurance programs are large and pervasive in developed economies .
In the U.S. , spending on Social Security ( Old Age , Disability , and Unemployment Insurance ) , Medicare , Medicaid amounted to 48.3\ % of total Federal spending and 9.8\ % of GDP in 2000 ( U.S. Congressional Budget Office ) .
All forecasts indicate that unless benefits are reduced , social insurance spending will grow rapidly over the coming decades as the baby boomers age and start to retire .
Although there have been proposals to shift the costs of social insurance from the government to the private sector via various privatization schemes , a variety of moral hazard and adverse selection problems hinder the operation of private insurance markets .
We take market incompleteness as the principal rationale for mandatory government provision of insurance , and as the basic point of departure for our analysis .
We assume that the government can compel universal participation , but we also assume that it faces the same informational constraints as private insurance institutions would face if they existed .
We deal with these fundamental informational asymmetries via two very different but related strategies 1 ) a dynamic mechanism design ( DMD ) approach where we search for an efficient policy over an infinite-dimensional space of all possible policies that satisfy certain participation and incentive constraints , and 2 ) a parametric mechanism design ( PMD ) approach where we search for an approximately efficient social insurance institution in a finite-dimensional subspace of social insurance institutions and where incentive constraints are ignored.Using these techniques we will not only be able to characterize the form of efficient social insurance institutions , we will also be able to quantify the degree of inefficiency in current social insurance institutions .
We expect to be able to characterize optimal social security and disability insurance programs as part of a comprehensive , integrated analysis of social insurance in the U.S. and other developed economies .
Given the large share of GDP devoted to social insurance , the potential cost savings from discovering more efficient social insurance programs provides a strong , practical rationale for this research .
This Small Business Innovation Research ( SBIR ) Phase I proposed innovation is an optically addressable , dynamically reconfigurable , bi-directional , high-density , optical interconnect micro-array based on the phenomenon of grating-coupled surface plasmon resonance ) .
The proposed device addresses the need for dense , fast , low power dissipation interconnect technology created by highly parallel , next generation computationalsystems .
These systems will require highly dense connection networks containing manylong-distance connections .
In such highly connected , highly parallel systems , the module-to-module and long distance chip-to-chip connections are responsible for the majority of the power dissipation , time delay and surface area .
Thus , it has become critically important to minimize the area , power and time delay of thechip-to-chip and module-to-module interconnects while , at the same time , increasing density and bandwidth .
Potential commercial applications effort will find applicability in a number of commercial markets .
These include emerging interconnect devices in electronics , generalMEMs fabrication and in photolithography , where it would save time and eliminate expensive photomasking processes .
Other potential markets includeoptical processing , certain applications in telecommunications and other miscellaneous applications for spatial light modulators .
0215073SinghThis Small Business Innovation Research project proposes to develop novel fluidization systems that are needed for synthesis of nano-encapsulated insulin particles for pulmonary drug delivery applications .
By coating the insulin particle with very thin ( 10-50 nm ) layer of biodegradable polymers such as polylactic acid ( PLA ) , the sustained release characteristics of insulin can be significantly altered .
The unique method has several advantages over conventional methods including low polymer loading , and impurity-free processing .
The nano-encapsulation method involves using laser ablation thin film deposition technique to coat drug particles which are fluidized in the gas phase .
This Phase I project will develop batch scale fluidization systems which are capable of fluidizing up to 1 kg of particles at a time.The commercial applications of this project are in the area of pharmaceutical drug delivery .
EAR-0215641Bradley HackerMost of the world 's earthquakes occur in subduction zones where oceanic lithosphere descends into the mantle .
Intermediate-depth earthquakes , which occur at 40-300 km depth , and the transport of water into the mantle are intimately linked to metamorphic reactions in the subducting lithosphere .
The researchers propose to better understand subduction-zone processes by integrating seismological observations with thermal and petrological models .
In order to test the dehydration-embrittlement hypothesis for intermediate-depth seismicity , the investigators will construct two-dimensional kinematic-dynamical thermal models for a set of subduction zones that span a range in subduction parameters and that include regions with significant along-strike variations in observed seismicity .
Events in global and regional seismicity data sets will be systematical evaluated and relocated in order to test the hypotheses that ( a ) upper seismic zones are confined to the subducting mafic crust , ( b ) lower seismic zones are related to dehydration reactions in the subducting mantle , and ( c ) the forearc mantle is aseismic .
Petrologic models of subducting lithosphere will be created using new phase diagrams and rock property data bases and the resulting layered seismic-velocity models will be tested against observed dispersion of seismic body waves .
The amount and distribution of forearc mantle hydration ( serpentinization ) will be quantified by integrating seismological observations with mineral physics calculations .
Acquisition of DNA Sequencing and Genotyping Instrumentation for Research and Undergraduate Training at Middlebury CollegeMatthew H. Dick , PIAbstract A grant has been awarded to Middlebury College under the direction of Dr. Dick to establish a DNA sequencing and genotyping facility at the college through acquisition of relevant instrumentation .
DNA sequencing is used to determine the sequence of 'letters ' in DNA , and is best known through its application in the Human Genome Project .
DNA genotyping allows unambiguous identification of genetically different individuals , and well-known applications include the DNA fingerprinting used in forensic work , as well as determination of paternity .
These tools are now fundamental to all disciplines of biology .
DNA sequences are used , for example , in studies ranging from identifying genes implicated in human diseases , to understanding the spread of HIV , to reconstructing the history of life on earth .
The DNA sequencing/genotyping facility at Middlebury College will enhance research by the faculty , foster new research directions , and help attract top faculty and students to the college .
Furthermore , it will spark undergraduate interest and augment training in molecular biology and its application across biological disciplines .
Dr. Dick and three other faculty in biology , who will be involved in the project as senior personnel , will make use of the sequencing/genotyping instrumentation to address diverse research problems .
Dr. Dick will sequence DNA from a widespread group of marine organisms called bryozoans in order to reconstruct their evolutionary relationships , which are poorly understood .
Dr. Helen Young will use genotyping to examine the effects of bird versus insect pollinators on the exchange of genetic material among flowering plant populations .
Dr. Vickie Backus will use genotyping to understand the diverse life history strategies of ants in New England forests .
Dr. Joshua Kavaler will sequence DNA in a study of gene regulation in fruit fly sense organ development .
In addition , several faculty will collaborate to design and implement a new undergraduate training course , Molecular Methods in Ecology and Evolution .
This course will provide students in ecology and evolution the knowledge they need to utilize molecular techniques in their research .
It will also give students in molecular genetics training they do not encounter in traditional courses .
The course will thus foster communication among students of diverse biological disciplines .
The research projects to which the instrumentation will initially be applied address basic problems in biology which , however , have broad significance .
Bryozoans , for example , are important as indicators of environmental quality , are a source of one class of potent anti-cancer drugs , and are exceptionally useful for evolutionary studies because of their excellent fossil record .
Studies of pollination are relevant to conservation , because they address the impact of introduced insect pollinators such as the honeybee on native plant populations .
Studies on forest ants address fundamental problems in evolutionary theory .
Cell signaling during fruit fly development makes use of molecular pathways identical to those in humans ; indeed , much of what we know of human gene function has derived from such studies .
Finally , the broadest and most important use of the instrumentation will be to spark interest in biology in the next generation of physicians and researchers , and train them in current techniques .
The scientific study of politics requires empirical testing of theoretical models , but theories are often produced without adequate testing and empirical work too frequently uses sketchy and oversimplified theory .
Gaps have appeared between theory and empirical method , and these gaps impair scientific progress .
To ameliorate this scholars need to train a new generation of scholars who can better link theory and empirical work .
The Principal Investigators will to foster this intellectual development by offering younger scholars an opportunity to learn by seeing and doing in conjunction with older scholars who have been leaders in advancing theory and empirical work , focusing on substantive areas where appreciable research integrating theory and methods already exists .
A successful Empirical Implications of Theoretical Models ( EITM ) summer program , given the current relative infancy of this approach to social science , must as much develop as disseminate substance .
Thus the key regarding training is that each institute include significant teaching and research components , providing students a high degree of individualized interaction with a far wider and deeper array of EITM mentors than are available at any individual institution .
The Principal Investigators have activities transcending passive receipt of lecture material , involving also significant opportunities to advance participants ' own research by employing their newly gained knowledge about the integration of theory and method .
The investigators foster integrated training by providing , in each of the four years from 2002-2005 , in four locations ( respectively Harvard , Michigan , Duke , and UC-Berkeley ) , a four-week summer program .
Each of these institutes accommodates up to 25 advanced graduate students and junior faculty .
The program is selective and admission is based significantly on the quality and potential of research presented .
A team of up to 15 research faculty conducts each institute in a framework detailed below .
The investigators take a broad view of the theoretical models and empirical methods used to evaluate and test implications .
Formal models on which instruction will build include game theory , differential equation dynamic models , and simple decision theory and more complicated behavioral decision-making models .
The empirical toolkit should cover not only statistical inference but also focused analytically-based case studies , and experimental methods .
Computational models have both theoretical and empirical relevance in the program .
Six areas are outlined that have sufficiently matured in combining micro-oriented , institutionally rich theory with rigorous structural estimation to offer fruitful possibilities for integrated instruction .
The six areas , with examples of integrated research and teaching outlines , cover spatial models , institutional analysis , macropolitical economy , bargaining and coalitions , international security , and international political economy .
The researchers include three such areas each year , and guarantee that there will be at least one repeat for cumulation and development and at least one new module each year .
Using multiple hosts capitalizes on diverse , regionally available deep pools of talent unavailable in any single location .
It offers regional balance in accessibility and fosters outreach to other departments in several locales .
The four have complementary strengths in computational models , experimentation , and macro- and international political economy .
A grant has been awarded to Dr. Bruce Kohorn at Bowdoin College in orderto purchase a confocal laser scanning microscope .
The microscope willprovide the ability to obtain high resolution fluorescent images from bothlive and fixed biological samples , and will become the only such instrumentin Maine at a liberal arts undergraduate college .
The microscope will beused to explore fundamental questions in neurobiology and behavior , plantdevelopment , nuclear protein transport , evolutionary genetics , andbiomechanics .
Seven faculty and their students from the Biology andPsychology departments of Bowdoin College , and two faculty from Bates andColby College will use the instrument to achieve high resolution images forbasic biological research .
The new instrument will be used by many faculty in their research ontopics that include the function of the nervous system , the organization ofcells , and the comparison of cellular structures so as to understand basicprocesses of evolution .
The students in research labs will be exposed tocurrent and standard technologies that they too will need to use once inmore advanced degree programs .
Students will be prepared for careers inBiology and related fields by providing the technical and theoreticalbackground for one of the most common methods of imaging in cell andmolecular biology .
Protein folding is a multifaceted poorly understood phenomenon of great biological significance .
Most of the published literature on the subject deals with the in vitro refolding of purified full-length denatured polypeptides .
In contrast , this project addresses cotranslational protein folding and misfolding , as it occurs within the ribosomal machinery .
The main goal of this research is to develop a novel methodology to study the mechanistic and conformational aspects of protein folding within the prokaryotic translation apparatus .
The folding kinetics of nascent polypeptide chains will be investigated in the context of the Escherichia coli translation machinery .
These studies will be performed by hydrogen/deuterium exchange pulse labeling in cell-free systems .
Liquid chromatography-coupled time-of-flight electrospray mass spectrometry and time-of-flight MALDI mass spectrometry will be employed for detection .
Apomyoglobin ( apoMb ) serves as a good model system for these studies since it is a well-characterized cytoplasmic protein with single domain containing all alpha-helical segments .
An apoMb gene with E. coli-optimized codon usage will be employed .
Control experiments will also be performed in parallel on chloramphenicol acetyltransferase .
The methodology developed in this project will set the stage to enable future investigations addressing important aspects of biologically relevant protein folding questions .
These include ( a ) studying whether cotranslational folding takes place during expression of small single domain proteins ; and ( b ) mapping nascent polypeptide conformation , and identifying which specific amino acids become folded or misfolded at different stages of chain elongation .
Very little is known about the structural aspects of how proteins fold or misfold in the cell .
This project aims at devising initial steps towards filling this gap .
A grant has been awarded to University of New Mexico to develop a prototype sensor to detect hantavirus infections in field .
It will be a rapid , hand held , automated device , which gives a quantitative determination of viral infections in small mammals .
As a result of this development several functioning devices will be tested in field conditions .
Currently samples from wild populations must be collected in the field and returned to the laboratory for testing , often taking days or weeks .
The work initially will be focused on the optimization of a sensor for fast ( 10-20 min ) determination of viral infections in the field and will be extended towards the development of an automated portable system to be used in field stations or other remote sites .
The next stage of the research will include miniaturization of a portable system and developed for rapid on-site determination of the viral infection in mammal samples in field research environments anywhere rapid viral detection is needed.The work will include the evaluation of the disposable sensing element , optimization of sensor column assembly and flow-injection system , engineering of the prototype of the sensor , optimization of the assay procedure and determination of optimal time for incubation , flow rates and temperature , development of fast assay for hantavirus infections in blood samples , characterization and validation of the assay procedure and comparing it with the conventional techniques .
Further work would include the miniaturization of the existing manually operated device and make it automated .
To accomplish this task a micro-controller , micro pump , disposable sensing element and a battery system will be used.This project brings together a multidisciplinary team from the University of New Mexico 's ( UNM ) Department of Biology , Department of Chemical and Nuclear Engineering and Department of Microbiology to develop the proposed instrumentation .
Conventional techniques for determination of viral infections ( immunoblot ) are qualitative , require relatively long process times ( 24 hours ) and must be conducted under laboratory conditions .
The awarded research will result in a sensor , which can be used in cases when the application of conventional immunoassay techniques is limited or impossible .
The sensor will be developed using disposable flow electrodes and is a means to conduct fast assay for hantavirus infection with an electrochemical detection .
Therefore , while employing different available immunochemicals , a variety of disposable elements can be designed for different kind of infections .
The resulting device from this project can be used for fast analyses of other viruses or metabolites under field conditions , in mobile units and may be applicable to detection of certain biological weapons .
The sensors can also be used for rapid analyses in conventional conditions of biological , physiological and analytical practices .
The University of New Mexico is a Hispanic serving institution .
A summer NIH/NSF workshop to attract minority and underrepresented students will be applied .
Competitively awarded support for University of Idaho ( UI ) research has steadily grown from $ 35 million in FY'96 to $ 63 million in FY'01.This increase is due , in part , to the research activities of severalmultidisciplinary research institutes and groups .
For example , UI'sNASA Grand Challenge team provided the top-ranking concept fordetecting extraterrestrial life .
This concept would be accomplishedin space using microelectromechanical systems ( MEMS ) technology .
Atpresent , UI simply does not have the capabilities needed to implementand test MEMS designs in their own laboratories for reliability inharsh environments .
In addition , UI researchers are conducting otherprojects expected to result in a miniaturized tandem mass spectrometersystem , miniature resonators , micro pumps , autonomous vehicle guidancesystems , magnetic random access memories , and magnetic films for small monolithic microwave integrated circuits .
All of these research activitieswill benefit from the added capabilities requested through the MajorResearch Instrumentation Program .
As a result of current progress in funded research projects , and withthe support of the university 's administration , the PIs seek to acquireinstruments to fabricate , test , and evaluate the robustness of newtechnologies .
This request includes a plasma enhanced chemical vapordeposition system , an e-beam evaporator , a vibration / shock table , athermal vacuum chamber , and a laser vibrometer .
Acquisition of theseinstruments will also provide more opportunities to integrate researchtraining with graduate and undergraduate education .
The University ofIdaho is requesting approximately $ 290,000 from the National ScienceFoundation from a total project cost of over $ 611,000 .
This equipmentwill add significant capabilities to their region by complementingexisting equipment at neighboring Washington State University and byproviding research equipment that is currently unavailable in the inlandNorthwest .
It will also provide additional opportunities for participantsin Idaho 's HOIST program ( Helping Orient Indian Students and Teachers toScience and Technology ) to get hands-on experience in engineeringresearch .
The project will be managed by experienced PIs who will use proveninstrument management approach to ensure efficient operation andmaintenance of the equipment .
A qualified engineering technician willassist them .
The equipment will be housed within a single building onthe main UI campus , and this MRI award will receive full administrativesupport from the Director and staff of the UI Microelectronics Researchand Communications Institute .
0215734SchaumloffelWith this award from the MRI program , the State University of New York College at Oneonta ( SUNY Oneonta ) will acquire an inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometer ( ICP-AES ) and microwave digestion system ( MDS ) .
The research carried out with these instruments , both at SUNY Oneonta and with colleagues at nearby Hartwick College , involves a wide array of geological , environmental and chemical studies .
These include studies of the elemental composition of metamorphic rock formations in New York and Montana , studies on the cycling of trace elements in environmental systems and specific studies of the accumulation and cycling of mercury in the Adirondack Region ( New York ) .
A major component of this project is the involvement of undergraduate students in laboratory-based research linked with field-work and the analysis of geological features in the field .
The acquisition of this instrumentation will greatly enhance our suite of shared analytical instrumentation at SUNY Oneonta , benefiting the research of a number of faculty members and improving undergraduate education .
*** This Small Business Innovation Research ( SBIR ) project will seek to achieve a quantum leap in sensitivity of gamma ray astronomy in the 100 keV to 10 MeV region through development of a novel high pressure xenon ( HPXe ) detector element for imaging the region of interest .
This development will incorporate ( 1 ) a cost-effective means of containing HPXe safely up to pressures of 3240 psig , ( 2 ) innovative means of measuring the spatial coordinates of gamma ray interactions within the HPXe detecting element for high quality spatial and angular measurements , and ( 3 ) novel methods of realizing the optimal spectroscopic properties of HPXe at a density of 0.55 g/cm3 to achieve an energy resolution approaching 0.45 % at 1 MeV .
A large array of such detecting elements could provide the ideal detector for a next generation HPXe Compton gamma ray telescope , having an angular resolution of a few tenths of a degree and providing a hundred-fold increase in sensitivity over that predicted for the upcoming Integral ( SPI ) satellite gamma observatory .
A scaled down version of such a telescope could also be used for regional neutron activation analysis of the Martian surface , remote detection applications , or an excellent alternative to HPGe detectors currently used in laboratory settings.The anticipated outcome of this project is a new basic detector element , which can be used for a variety of space physics , field detection , and laboratory applications .
The physical characteristics of such a detector combined with an order of magnitude improvement in energy resolution make it well suited for gamma detection in the 100 keV to 5 MeV band aboard satellite or balloon-borne instruments .
Another very exciting application of this technology is a spectrometer for detection of radiation emitted as a result of neutron activation of the Martian surface .
Such research could provide important data regarding planetary soil composition .
In addition to astrophysics applications , a high energy resolution detector element based on high pressure xenon cylindrical detectors has significant commercial potential as a replacement for HPGe because the requirement of cryogenic cooling is eliminated , resulting in greater convenience and broader applicability .
HPGe is currently employed in many laboratory settings , and the proposed technology could offer a cheaper and much more convenient alternative .
This Small Business Innovation Research ( SBIR ) Phase I Project proposes to investigate the application of an automatic inference engine called Discovery Machine to the domain of gene mapping .
Discovery Machine is a set of knowledge acquisition tools that aid experts in solving problems over large amounts data .
The proposed enhancements to the Discovery Machine will allow genetics experts to model their own strategies for interpreting the information needed to map genes .
The development of bioinformatics tools is aimed at researchers who wish to better leverage computing power to solve problems across large sets of data but can not easily write software to enable their efforts.The commercial application of this project is in the area of bioinformatics .
AST-0215793Oppenheimer , Ben R.This project will produce a new coronagraph system to extend the well-understood and tested techniques of the classical coronagraph at the 3.67 meter Advanced Electro-Optical System ( AEOS ) telescope of the United States Air Force observatory at Haleakela , Maui , Hawaii .
AEOS is equipped with a very high order ( 960 elements ) adaptive optics unit to correct for atmospheric turbulence .
The AEOS adaptive optics unit dramatically surpreses the seeing halo between radii of 0.2 and 1.5 arcseconds at a wavelength of 1.6 micrometers .
It is within this region of the spatial information domain that enables compelling scientific analysis for the nearby vicinities of brown dwarfs , super-Jupiter planets , extra-solar system zodiacal dust disks .
This instrumentation development establishes a new instrumentation program to provide graduate students in New York City to peruse instrumentation-based research programs .
Undergraduates from an all-women college in New York will participate .
*** AbstractA grant has been awarded to Dr. Steven W. Runge and colleagues at the University of Central Arkansas ( UCA ) to obtain a Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope ( LSCM ) .
This instrument has the ability to capture images of cells and cellular structures that are tagged with fluorescent markers with a resolution unmatched by other types of light microscopy .
The ability of the LSCM to acquire optical sections and construct 3-D images from a variety of live and prepared tissues and to perform time-course analyses on living cells and tissues will impact a wide range of research programs at UCA .
Investigations that will employ the LSCM range from 3-D reconstruction of complex tissues such as actively growing plant shoots and brains of rats and marine snails to tracking the movement of structures inside of cultured cells and native tissues .
Collectively , acquisition of this instrument will elevate faculty and student research at UCA to new levels of sophistication .
This will allow researchers to address questions that previously were inaccessible .
A significant benefit of having this work conducted at UCA , rather than at distant institutions , will be the heightened opportunities for our undergraduates to become involved in research .
Our graduate students ( master 's level ) will also acquire important experience and skills that will promote future research and professional study.The LSCM will be used to address a wide variety of research questions in the natural sciences .
These include the rapid assay and localization of plant pigments involved in responses to UV-light ; morphological characterization of neurons in the white matter of mammalian brains ; tracking the exocytic insertion of potassium channels into intestinal membranes for osmoregulation in marine gastropods ; visualization of synaptic connections involved in behavioral decisions in whole brains of marine gastropods ; understanding mechanisms that underlie the selective death of Purkinje cells during maturation of the rat cerebellum ; tracking the movement of developmental signals that direct inflorescence architecture in flowering plants ; examination of secretory canals in plants and the effects of trenching insects on latex/oil distribution ; and ratio imaging to monitor intracellular pH and time-course imaging of vesicular trafficking of Na+/H+ exchangers in cultured cells undergoing apoptosis .
Methodologies to be employed include visualization of autofluorescent molecules and structures in plant tissues , tagging stuctures with fluorescent antibodies , filling individual brain cells with fluorescent molecules to identify connections to other cells , and labeling cell-surface proteins with fluorescent markers to follow the movement of these proteins to and from the cell surface under different conditions.In addition to research , the LSCM will be a valuable addition to science instruction at UCA .
Confocal microscopy will help students visualize complex 3-D processes in biology and make measurements on living cells that will be invaluable assets to teaching .
For instance , stages of frog embryo development will be recorded as a set of 3-D , time-course images that trace this dynamic process .
These images will then be made available for analysis in the classroom .
The stunning images produced by LSCM will also be used to generate interest in the sciences among high school students and teachers through various outreach programs and the Arkansas education media centered here on the UCA campus .
The University 's enrollment of about 8,500 students is 62 % female and 19 % minority , with the later group steadily increasing in proportion over the last decade .
Acquisition of the LSCM will strengthen faculty research capabilities , support strong undergraduate research programs , attract more women and minority students to careers in the sciences , increase public appreciation of science , and support programs in a historically under-supported geographic area .
This Major Research Instrumentation award to University of Washington supports the development of a fiber optic back scatter instrument , FOBS-2 , which will be used for research in near-bottom sediment transport .
The instrument will provide closely spaced , accurate measurements of suspended sediment concentration near the bottom in high energy , near-shore environments , providing a significant improvement over existing capabilities .
The present award will support system design , fabrication of two instruments , and testing in both laboratory and field settings .
The instrument design will be made available to other researchers , and University of Washington will also build instruments for other research groups .
New insights in biology have often come from studies of animals that exhibit some extreme of performance .
In such animals , principles of function common to all animals are exaggerated , and are therefore observed and studied more readily .
Ballistic tongue projection in toads represents one such extreme of performance .
During ballistic tongue projection , toad tongues can be projected from the mouth at accelerations exceeding 2000 m/s2 .
Previous and ongoing research in our laboratories has focused on elucidating the mechanisms by which the mouth opening muscles of toads produce the power required for this extremely rapid movement.During ballistic tongue projection , the mouth opening muscles of toads are activated for about 200 ms prior to rapid mouth opening .
Inspired by this pattern of activation , the investigators developed a novel technique to quantify the in vivo force-velocity behavior of this muscle .
The technique is similar to the well known quick-release or load-clamp techniques .
The insertion of a muscle is attached to a dual servo motor force-lever , preserving the in vivo origin and line of action of the muscle .
A stimulator is programmed to preactivate the muscle tetanically for a given time against a load that prevents the muscle from shortening .
The force-lever is then released instantaneously to some smaller load that is varied systematically .
The smaller the load , the greater the velocity of shortening.Preactivated isotonic force-velocity and power curves were constructed using data collected from these experiments , an innovation of this laboratory .
The investigators have demonstrated that 200 ms preactivation increases the shortening velocity , and therefore the power output , of the mouth opening muscles of toads by about twenty-fold .
They further showed that 200 ms preactivation increased the power output of a frog hind limb muscle by the same factor .
These results suggest that enhancement of muscle power by isometric preactivation is likely a fundamental , though previously unknown , property of skeletal muscle.Both jaw and hind limb muscles shorten rapidly when clamped to smaller loads after 200 ms preactivation , and reach final velocity in a very short period of time ( 3-8 ms ) , which increases with increasing load .
At the instant of release when the muscle is shortening rapidly , the force of shortening ( F ) is equal to mv/t , where m = the mass of that part of the muscle that is shortening plus the external load , v = the observed shortening velocity , and t = the time required to reach the observed velocity .
The shorter the time required to reach a given velocity , the greater the force at the time of release .
The present results demonstrate that the force of shortening increases substantially when muscles are preactivated compared to standard isotonic tests .
The proposed studies will permit validation of this new technique , and quantification of the effects of preactivation on the force-velocity behavior of other muscles .
This novel method has the potential to significantly impact the field of muscle physiology , and to inform our basic understanding of the mechanism of contraction in striated muscle .
Research shows that people usually act to maintain their image of themselves in social identities that they occupy- identities like father or son , boss or employee , friend or adversary .
Current theories of identity assume that people only see themselves in one identity in each social situation , and that their behavior is guided by attempts to support that identity .
Recently , the PIs have begun to consider more complex situations where people see themselves in two or more identities at the same time .
For example , a policeman who stops a speeder who turns out to be his uncle is in a situation where he is simultaneously a law enforcement officer and a nephew .
In this research the investigators will extend their research to examine what kinds of social systems make people more or less likely to have many identities .
They will develop a theory to answer this question using computer simulations and principles about how groups and networks are related in social systems .
They also investigate what kinds of situations lead people to enact more than one identity at a time , and how these situations affect how they feel .
A data set that samples the situations in which University of Arizona students , faculty and staff found themselves will be used to test predictions that multiple-identity occupancy causes stress and the experience of mixed emotions .
With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation ( MRI ) Program , the Department of Chemistry at Mesa State College will acquire preparative scale supercritical fluid ( SCF ) extraction equipment , preparative scale centrifugal countercurrent chromatography ( CCC ) equipment with UV detector , and accessories .
This equipment will enhance research in a number of areas a ) plant secondary metabolites as mediators of trophic interactions in a tropical forest community ; b ) phytochemical investigation of cryptobiotic crusts and their alleged allelopathic interaction with non-native grasses ; c ) phytochemistry of neotropical piper species related to piper cenocladum and their role in defense against attine ant species ; d ) caterpillars of the Costa Rican rain forest ; e ) chemical mediation of trophic cascades in alfalfa and implications for biological control ; and f ) development of methodologies utilizing supercritical CO2 as a reaction solvent .
The green approach to natural products isolation that will be developed with this equipment is timely and will benefit students in their future employment .
In addition , these techniques could be of great value to scientists in the developing nations of Latin America whose immense biodiversity represents a wealth of undiscovered natural products of enormous potential .
Therefore , scientists from Latin America who would otherwise not have access to SCF and CCC equipment will collaborate with the PI .
EAR-0215534van Keken Most of the world 's earthquakes occur in subduction zones where oceanic lithosphere descends into the mantle .
Intermediate-depth earthquakes , which occur at 40-300 km depth , and the transport of water into the mantle are intimately linked to metamorphic reactions in the subducting lithosphere .
The researchers propose to better understand subduction-zone processes by integrating seismological observations with thermal and petrological models .
In order to test the dehydration-embrittlement hypothesis for intermediate-depth seismicity , the investigators will construct two-dimensional kinematic-dynamical thermal models for a set of subduction zones that span a range in subduction parameters and that include regions with significant along-strike variations in observed seismicity .
Events in global and regional seismicity data sets will be systematical evaluated and relocated in order to test the hypotheses that ( a ) upper seismic zones are confined to the subducting mafic crust , ( b ) lower seismic zones are related to dehydration reactions in the subducting mantle , and ( c ) the forearc mantle is aseismic .
Petrologic models of subducting lithosphere will be created using new phase diagrams and rock property data bases and the resulting layered seismic-velocity models will be tested against observed dispersion of seismic body waves .
The amount and distribution of forearc mantle hydration ( serpentinization ) will be quantified by integrating seismological observations with mineral physics calculations .
-- 0215953RumbleThe acquisition of a new isotope-ratio-monitoring , gas chromatograph inlet mass spectrometer ( IRMS-GC MS ) equipped with four collectors and four channel output for simultaneous analysis of the ion beams of SF6 will make it possible to develop a new ultraviolet ( UV ) laser fluorination microprobe for the analysis of 32S , 33S , 34S , and 36S in sulfide minerals .
Based on previous experience with the successful in situ microanalysis of oxygen isotopes in silicate minerals , it should be possible to measure 50-micrometer diameter spots on sulfide minerals with a precision of 0.1 to 0.2 per mil in d33S and d34S and 0.05 per mil in ? 33S .
Analysis for d36S will be at a lower level of precision owing to the rarity of the isotope 36S .
A new UV laser macroprobe and GC purification system has already been built and validated for 400 micrometer diameter spot measurements of sulfur isotopes using an existing mass spectrometer that is incapable of GC-continuous flow operation .
The new IRMS-GC MS requested from NSF-MRI is needed to improve analytical spatial resolution from 400 to 50 micrometers .
The new sulfur isotope microprobe will be used to test the validity of the discovery of mass-independent sulfur isotope anomalies in Archean rocks by direct fluorination of sulfide minerals .
The proposed relationship between the anomalies and the oxygenation of Earth 's atmosphere will be tested by detailed measurements of drill cores spanning the Archean-Proterozoic transition .
The mechanisms responsible for fixing mass-independent signatures in rocks will be investigated through spatially resolved analyses of inter-mineral fractionations and intra-mineral isotopic heterogeneity .
The new microprobe 's capacity to analyze microgram samples will be put to use in a laboratory study of the fractionation of sulfur isotopes by microbes .
Use of the new sulfur isotope microprobe will be open to qualified users from throughout the research community .
With support from the Major Research Instrumentation ( MRI ) and the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities ( CRIF ) Programs , Prof. Brooks H. Pate of the University of Virginia will develop a state-of-the-art laser 2D microwave spectrometer .
This will introduce time-domain molecular rotational spectroscopy as a new technique to study chemical reaction dynamics .
Chemical reactions are described as population transfer between different localized structures .
For example , the reaction can take place between different electronic states where the electronic configuration is different for the reactant and product .
Molecular isomerization reactions can similarly be described as changes in the nuclear configuration of the molecule .
One common feature of reactions is that the molecular structure is usually different in the reacting configurations .
For isomerization reactions , this result is readily apparent .
For reactions between different electronic states , there is often a structural change caused by the different bonding of the two electronic configurations .
During the chemical reaction the moments-of-intertia are time-dependent quantities .
The reaction kinetics can , therefore , be determined by measuring the time evolution of the rotational spectrum .
The successful development of this new field of molecular spectroscopy will make it possible to unravel reaction pathways for complex reactions involving several isomers .
Methanogens are microorganisms that produce methane gas as the end product of their metabolism , and they are critical to a wide range of anaerobic microbiological decomposition processes .
Such processes include digestion in ruminants and other animals , decay in natural aquatic environments , and man-made processes such as those used for municipal and industrial waste treatment .
For our society , methane , on one-hand poses potential problems as a greenhouse gas , while at the same time it also serves as an extremely useful , clean-burning fuel .
Nearly two-thirds of the methane produced in Nature is derived from decomposition of acetate by methanogens , and this project is contributing new molecular details of how these organisms carry out cleavage of the carbon-carbon bond in acetate .
Acetogenic and methanogenic microorganisms carry out synthesis and breakdown of large quantities of acetic acid from one-carbon precursors/products under anaerobic conditions using a highly unusual enzymatic process in which the carbon-carbon bond of acetic acid is activated .
Nickel plays an indispensable role in this process , serving as a component of a unique Ni-Fe/S cluster at the active site of a 5-subunit-containing multienzyme complex ( designated ACDS for acetyl-CoA decarbonylase/synthase ) responsible for acetate cleavage in species of Methanosarcina .
The Ni-Fe cluster is bound to the beta subunit of the complex , which also is the site for binding of substrates CoA and acetyl-CoA .
Although it is now clear that Ni is an essential element for carbon-carbon bond activation , structural information on the Ni-Fe center is lacking , and little is known about the steps involved in formation and assembly of the Ni-Fe cluster .
Such information is critical to develop a clear understanding of how Ni functions in the activation of acetate .
The goal of this project is to identify steps in the pathway of assembly of the ACDS beta-subunit active site metal cluster by characterizing the role of the accessory protein ACDS-ORF in the process of Ni insertion into the Fe-containing apoenzyme .
Incorporation of nickel is monitored by spectroscopic methods and enzymatic functional assays .
Additional proteins that participate in the assembly of the beta-subunit Ni-Fe center are being sought by a combination of molecular biological two-hybrid assays and standard biochemical methods of fractionation and analysis .
Detailed knowledge of how nickel functions as part of the Ni-Fe active center in the ACDS beta subunit will be obtained from experiments to characterize the coordination environment of nickel .
X-ray absorption spectroscopic methods ( Ni EXAFS and Ni L-edge spectroscopy ) are providing the geometry , number of ligands to Ni , their chemical nature , and average bond distances .
Site-directed mutagenesis experiments are being used to identify amino acid residues serving as potential ligands to Ni , and mutants will be characterized for their ability to bind Ni , undergo changes in coordination environment and to function in acetate activation .
The results from this project will provide new information on the structure , function and formation of an unusual Ni-Fe/S cluster , leading to a better understanding of its biochemistry and its unique physiological role in catalyzing the activation of acetate .
The Center for Subsurface Modeling ( CSM ) , part of the TexasInstitute for Computational and Applied Mathematics at TheUniversity of Texas at Austin , will purchase 64 PCs , acontrol workstation , as well as a storage device , in orderto constuct a parallel computing platform capable of100 Gflops .
The network for the cluster ( high speed Myrinetnetwork ( 1Gbit ) and a 100Mb ethernet network ) is already inplace .
This platform will be dedicated to research in themathematical sciences being led by CSM .
Projects that willuse this platform include large-scale multiphysics modelingof subsurface processes , multiscale modeling of flow inextremely heterogeneous rocks , finite element coastal andocean modeling , parallel terascale iterative solvers , andDiscontinuous Galerkin discretization methods .
A substantialcomponent of each of these projects is the development ofnew scalable parallel algorithms as well as implementationand testing of both proof-of-concept as well as ofproduction-quality codes for simulation of cases driven byenergy and environment applications .
A dedicatedlimited-access resource greatly expedites such development.The Center for Subsurface Modeling , part of the TexasInstitute for Computational and Applied Mathematics at TheUniversity of Texas at Austin , will purchase equipment neededto construct a medium size parallel computer capable of100 billion arithmetic operations per second .
This computerwill be dedicated to research in the mathematical andcomputational sciences being led by CSM .
Researchersinvolved in the project have decades of experience indevelopment of robust , accurate and fast computationaltechniques .
The new cluster will allow for large-scalecomputational modeling and testing of such techniques whichpromise to improve ability to understand , predict , monitor , and control natural and engineered processes occuring insurface and subsurface .
Significant examples includeoptimization of oil and gas recovery , analysis ofcontamination and remediation scenarios in subsurface andsurface waters like aquifer and coastal environments .
Theaccess to a dedicated computing resource willgreatly expedite such development .
SES-0215366PI ( s ) Don Grant IIUniversity of Arizona The project addresses two questions concerning the environmental performance of absentee owned plants ( 1 ) Do plants with out-of-state or foreign headquarters emit more toxins than locally owned plants ? , and ( 2 ) Do plants with remote headquarters pollute more depending on the social capital of their host communities .
Critics of globalization and capitalist expansion suggest that absentee owned plants have no long-term interest in local communities as places to live .
Rather they are very willing to plunder their natural surroundings if it will maximize their parent firm 's profits .
Meanwhile literature on structural embeddedness suggest that this organizational model is too simplistic , that regardless of where a plant 's headquarters is located , a plant 's performance is conditioned by the local institutional culture in which it is situated .
The research will test several hypothesis- ( 1 ) chemical plants with out-of-state or foreign headquarters have higher emission rates ( i.e. , release a larger percent of chemicals they use on-site to the environment ) , ( 2 ) chemical plants with out-of-state or foreign headquarters have higher emission rates when located in civically disengaged communities , and ( 3 ) chemical plants with out-of-state ore foreign headquarters have particularly high emission rates when located in communities that are both civically disengaged and comprised of poor minorities .
To test these hypotheses , a data file consisting of roughly 2000 chemical plants will be used .
The file includes information on each plant 's toxic releases from the EPA 's Toxics Release Inventory , its ownership status , and the social and institutional features of its surrounding community .
A cross-section design will be used to determine the direct and conditional effects of absentee ownership on emission rates in 1990 .
To assess how these effects have changed a lagged panel design will be employed.Findings will provide new insights into what is rapidly becoming the modal type of business organization absentee ownership .
Prior research has demonstrated that absentee ownership has economic and social effects ; this study will be the first to specify some of the conditions under which absentee ownership also has environmental consequences .
Results could potentially guide regulators in deciding whether to monitor plants owned by foreign firms more closely , and the business community in its efforts at self-regulation .
GroveEAR-0215547It is paradoxical that the mantle sources with the highest 3He/4He and 22Ne/21Ne , and argued to be the least-degassed and therefore the most primitive or primordial , have uniformly depleted ( not primitive ) Sr , Nd , and Hf isotope signatures .
This is an unexplained and long-standing flaw in the Standard Model for rare gas evolution in the earth .
One of the assumptions underlying the Standard Model is that He is more incompatible than Th and U during upper mantle melting processes , and that it will be preferentially removed during melting and subsequent eruptive degassing .
Existing data for mineral-melt partitioning of He ranges over several orders of magnitude , and does not place any real constraints on this most important assumption of the Standard Model .
This project will address this issue by methodical experimental measurement of He , Th and U partitioning between olivine , clinopyroxene and silicate melt .
The study will provide new solubility data for true structural-bound He in both natural and synthetic olivine and clinopyroxene , and in silicate melt , over a wide range of temperature , pressure , and oxygen fugacity .
Helium in single-phase experimental charges will be analyzed first by crushing in vacuo ( to release helium from cracks , voids and defects ) followed by fusion in an utrahigh vacuum furnace .
He in multi-phase charges will be analyzed by in-situ laser-ablation .
U and Th partitioning data will also be determined over the same range of conditions for olivine/melt and clinopyroxene/melt equilibrium pairs in simple Fe-free haplobasaltic systems .
The experiments will be designed to provide a direct comparison between Th-U partitioning and He partitioning .
Ultimately , the resulting data will allow an assessment of a key question in terrestrial helium isotope evolution is high 3He/4He synonymous with an undegassed or relatively primordial mantle source ?
The answer to this question has broad significance to the CSEDI community , as helium is one of the only lines of evidence for relatively undegassed material in the deep earth. -- This Small Business Innovation Research ( SBIR ) Phase II project will refine the polymer matrix of glass fiber composites with ion exchangers in order to enhance their longevity in the alkaline environment of concrete .
Glass fiber composites offer a desirable balance of performance and cost for replacement of corrosion-prone steel reinforcement in concrete ; their rapid deterioration in the alkaline environment of concrete is , however , a major setback .
Ion exchangers are insoluble solids carrying cations ( or anions ) which can be exchanged with ions of the same sign .
Cation exchangers of hydrogen form replace alkali metal cations ( e.g. , K + in alkaline solutions diffusing into the polymer matrix ) with H + .
This exchange of cations neutralizes aggressive alkaline solutions by converting K + OH - ( and Na + OH - , etc .
) into H2O .
Through laboratory investigations and industrial-scale pultrusion efforts , the Phase I research demonstrated that introduction of selected ion exchangers into the polymer matrix ( or a surface layer of matrix ) does not interfere with the pultrusion process , and yields significant gains in alkali resistance of glass fiber composites .
The Phase I effort also established a theoretical context for selection of the dosage of cation exchanger in the polymer matrix of glass fiber composites , and verified the economic viability of our approach .
The proposed Phase II project will ( 1 ) develop refined theoretical principles and design procedures for formulation of polymer matrices with ion exchangers ; ( 2 ) develop and experimentally verify optimum polymer matrix formulations incorporating ion exchangers ; ( 3 ) optimize the pultrusion process of glass fiber composites with the refined polymer system , and fully characterize the end products ; and ( 4 ) evaluate the structural performance and durability of concrete systems reinforced with refined glass fiber composite bars through comprehensive laboratory studies complemented with a field investigation involving design , construction and monitoring of a reinforced concrete bridge deck .
The Phase II effort will receive critical support from major manufacturers of composite rebars ( including Hughes Brothers , the world leader in this field ) , the leading supplier of ion exchangers ( Dow Chemical ) , Michigan Department of Transportation , and Michigan Economic Development Corporation .
Michigan State University ( Composite Materials & Structures Center ) will also take part in the proposed research effort.Close to one-third of reinforced concrete structures , including bridges , parking structures , buildings in coastal areas and offshore structures , are exposed to corrosive environments ( deicer salt , seawater spray , etc .
) ; domestic sales of steel for reinforcement of these concrete structures is about $ 2 billion/yr .
Glass fiber composites embodying our technology are resistant to both corrosive effects and the alkaline environment of concrete ; they offer a desirable balance of performance and cost to replace steel reinforcement in corrosive environments .
Major savings in life-cycle cost can be realized at competitive initial cost through replacement of steel reinforcement with alkali-resistant glass fiber composites in concrete structures exposed to corrosive environments .
Glass fiber composite jackets and sheets applied onto concrete surfaces for repair/rehabilitation purposes are also prone to attack by the alkaline pore solution of concrete , representing another market opportunity for our technology .
We have filed a patent application , and have reached agreements with Dow Chemical ( leading supplier of ion exchangers ) and Hughes Brothers ( world 's leading manufacturer of composite bars for concrete reinforcement ) towards transfer of the technology to marketplace .
This grant supports development of a low-temperature , ultra-high vacuum , scanning tunneling microscope , which employs two 100 % spin-polarized tips .
In this new instrument spin-polarized electrons will tunnel into GaAs at one location , traverse through a small region of the sample , and then tunnel out through another tunnel junction .
To achieve this , a novel double-cleaved sample preparation procedure will be developed that uses two STM tips separated by an adjustable parameter from a few nanometers to millimeters .
This system will be used to study the coherent transport properties of spin-polarized electrons and , in addition , will allow the study of quantum mechanical transport properties for coupled spin-dependent tunneling junctions .
A coherent electron spin current will be injected using a ferromagnetic-metal STM tip ( 100 % spin-polarized single-crystal Ni < 110 > wire ) , and then coherently removed using another ferromagnetic-metal STM tip .
By being at low temperatures the spin-relaxation lifetime is significantly extended , allowing high signal-to-noise ratio data acquisition .
This development is complimented with an educational program designed to enhance the understanding of science by the general public .
This equipment is critical for studying the complex properties of spintronics devices .
Students will gain valuable skills in the development of this equipment and will be able to transfer the technology to other interested parties upon graduation .
The revolutionary idea of spintronics currently hinges on discovering how to coherently transfer the electron spin from one material to another .
This research can provide significant guidance toward achieving this goal , thereby influencing the research fields of surface physics , magnetism , device physics , basic electron-spin physics , electronic materials , and microscopy .
This award provides support to establish a COSEE Center in California with three distributed complementary partners the Lawrence Hall of Science on the campus of the University of California at Berkeley ( informal science partner ) , Scripps Institution-University of California San Diego ( research partner ) and Monterey Peninsula College ( a public community college and formal education partner ) in Monterey .
The activities of the proposed COSEE will be organized around four primary initiatives 1 ) an outreach effort based at Scripps to engage ocean scientists in K-14 education and the interpretation of their research , 2 ) the development of an undergraduate course Communicating Ocean Science designed to increase the involvement of undergraduates , graduate students and scientists in educational outreach , 3 ) the development of an Ocean Careers web site and 4 ) developing and testing an Ocean Immersion Site for K-12 education based at Scripps to serve the large and culturally diverse population of the San Diego area .
The work of this COSEE will enhance the integration of research and education in California by linking some of the best ocean science researchers in the world to science education in both formal and informal settings .
The California COSEE 's focus on working with schools and school districts in the diverse San Diego area will provide additional resources to strengthen science education and increase access to knowledge and careers among underrepresented populations .
Several of the initiatives in this proposal will add diversity and balance to the mosaic of approaches and activities to be implemented by the COSEE network .
In particular , the extension model is a unique 'user-centered ' approach to getting more scientists involved that clearly needs to be developed and its effectiveness assessed .
The undergraduate course in communicating science has potential as a professional development vehicle for college faculty , graduate students and undergraduate majors ; this component is being co-funded by NSF 's Division of Undergraduate Education .
The DUE 's Advanced Technology Education program is also providing co-funding for the Careers website at Monterey Peninsula College .
0215134WohlThis award supports a collaborative research project between Professor Ellen Wohl of Colorado State University and Professor Timothy Davies of Lincoln University in Canterbury , New Zealand .
While mountainous regions provide the major water source for many regions and produce a disproportionately large amount of the global sediment budget , we know relatively little about the basic processes operating along mountain river channels .
This project will investigate mountain rivers to understand relationships between potential control variables ( valley gradient , discharge , bedrock substrate resistance , and local sediment supply ) and response variables ( channel geometry and flow hydraulics ) .
The study will be conducted on the northwest side of the South Island of New Zealand where mountainous catchments remain largely unimpacted by human activities .
Knowledge gained should help in developing effective management schemes for mountain drainage basins .
This project will benefit from the expertise and facilities of both the U.S. and Australian institutions , and will include the active participation of American students in the international collaboration .
This Small Business Technology Transfer ( STTR ) Phase I project will explore high efficient , long lifetime and inexpensive light emitting diodes ( LEDs ) based on semiconductor nanocrystals .
The fabrication technology of the semiconductor nanocrystal LEDs is very much similar to the one used for the fabrication of polymer LEDs for commercial purposes .
As a result , the commercial potential of the nanocrystal LEDs relays mainly on the optical quality of the nanocrystals .
This project design adopts two recent technologies , which yields semiconductor nanocrystals with extremely high emission efficiency and exceptional chemical and thermal stability .
The dendron ligand technology provides nanocrystals with exceptional stability against the chemical processing and the thermal effect in the operation of the devices .
The nanocrystals synthesized using the bright point concept produces unprecedented optical quality , about 80 percent photoluminescence quantum yield , 23-27 nm emission full peak width at half maximum , and tunable emission window from 450-700 nm .
With those high optical quality and highly processable semiconductor nanocrystals , it is possible that a new generation of semiconductor nanocrystal LEDs , which have at least compatible performance to the polymer LEDs , but with low cost and continuous tunable and narrow emission profile.The commercial potential of the polymer LEDs and nanocrystal LEDs will highly depend on the lifetime and the cost of the devices .
Nanocrystal LEDs possess nearly all of the advantages of polymer LEDs , but with significantly more tunable and narrow emission profile .
At this stage , the commercial standard for the lifetime of the polymer LEDs is around several thousand hours .
The commercial goal this project is to boost the performance of the nanocrystal LEDs to at least the level of that of polymer LEDs .
The usage of those devices is on portable electronic devices , such as portable computer and cellular telephone .
0215183NguyenThis Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes to improve delivery of clinically used drugs through formulation of a non-toxic , tissue-specific drug delivery vehicle .
A number of drugs and drug delivery vehicles cause toxic side effects , thereby limiting the drug dose that can be administered .
This Phase I Project proposes to solve these problems by using a proprietary mixture of non-phospholipid lipids for drug delivery .
Suspensions of lipid-coated microbubbles ( LCM ) , made with this lipid mixture , have been found to be highly tumor selective .
Paclitaxel , delivered in LCM , has been shown to reduce tumors in rats more effectively when compared to paclitaxel delivered in the traditional vehicle , and produced less systemic toxicity .
However , there are no methods currently available to generate LCM on a commercial scale .
In the course of this Phase I Project , lipid nanoparticles from the proprietary lipid mixture will be developed using a high pressure homogenizer .
This will be followed by the formulation of a number of clinically used drugs in lipid and trsting of these formulations in cultured tumor cells.The commercial application of this project will be in the area of pharmaceutical drug delivery .
A grant has been awarded to Drs .
Xiahong Feng , Carol Folt and Stefan Sturup at Dartmouth College to purchase a Gas Chromatography-Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry ( GC-ICPMS ) system .
The unique feature of this instrument is that it provides an interface between a GC and an ICPMS .
This makes it possible to simultaneously measure chemical speciation and isotope ratios of inorganic and organic metal containing compounds .
For example , one can determine 201Hg/202Hg ratios in inorganic mercury and methylmercury of water or biological samples .
Such analytical power offers a variety of opportunities for innovative observations and experiments , involving volatile metal compounds , with important applications in environmental and health sciences .
Most organometallic compounds are significantly more toxic than the corresponding inorganic forms .
Therefore , the importance of specific determination in environmental and biomedical samples is widely appreciated .
This instrument will be installed at the Dartmouth Trace Element Analysis Core Facility ( TEA Core ) , joining an existing High Resolution-ICPMS and an ion chromatography ( IC ) system.The Dartmouth TEA Core serves a large number of PIs and students doing interdisciplinary research in environmental and health sciences .
The new instrument will promote our research activities in three ways .
First , it provides new analytical capabilities , such as mercury speciation and isotope analysis and isolation of Se from selenoproteins .
Second , it improves the quality of some elemental measurements ( e.g. , rare earth elements ) .
Finally , it will share the analytical load of our HR-ICPMS , so that technical development work ( e.g. , As speciation ) can be carried out using additional machine time .
A new project enabled by this instrument is a study of the biomagnification of heavy metals , especially mercury , in aquatic food webs .
Methylmercury in the tissue of plankton and fish from more than 20 lakes with different food web structures will be compared .
Quantitative estimates of the influence of zooplankton species , size and relative abundance on the buildup of toxic mercury in fish from each lake will used construct a predictive model for mercury trophic transfer across lakes .
Laboratory experiments with stable isotopes of mercury will be used to develop mechanistic models for trophic transfer at the low levels of mercury found in natural systems .
Other new and existing projects that will benefit from this equipment include human health effects of exposure to toxic elements , interaction of toxic metal with cellular proteins , mechanisms of contaminant transport through watersheds , and reconstructions of chemical and climatic history of the earth.By becoming a part of Dartmouth 's TEA Core , the new GC-ICPMS will offer expanded opportunities for graduate and undergraduate education in the area of emerging technology .
The TEA core is served as major foci for interdisciplinary research and scientific communication among experts in many departments within Dartmouth .
Dartmouth 's TEA core is open for student research from first year undergraduates to Ph.D. students .
Eighteen graduate students/postdocs and 15 undergraduate students have used the instruments of the facility .
The lab has also been used for classroom education in a few Dartmouth classes , including undergraduate level Environmental Geology , and graduate level Watershed Hydrochemistry and Analytical Chemistry and Instrumental Analysis .
0215304SyageThis Small Business Innovation Research Phase I Project proposes to test a method for conductinghigh-throughput , automated analysis of the protein content of cell lines using a novel mass analyzed 2D liquid-phase separation technique .
The conventional method of 2D PAGE ( Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis ) has several limitations .
It is labor intensive , time consuming , difficult to automate and often not readily reproducible .
In addition , quantitation , especially in differential expression experiments , is often difficult and limited in dynamic range .
The proposed technology provides automated , faster , and more accurate 2D protein maps , and can be used to purify specific proteins and enact protein/peptide digest and sequencing information .
These capabilities will prove valuable for studying drug-protein interactions for detecting early signs of cancer .
Studies of cancer cell lines can reveal signatures of cancerous cells that can serve as markers for actual diagnosis .
The proposed system is based on 2D liquid-phase protein separation using chromatofocusing ( CF ) in one dimension and non-porous silica , reverse-phase , high-performance liquid chromatography ( NPS-RP HPLC ) in the second dimension .
The HPLC eluent is monitored in real-time by on-line electrospray ionization ( ESI ) mass spectrometry ( MS ) to provide molecular weight and intensity information .
The commercial application of this project is in the area of proteomics .
This market is forecasted to grow from $ 0.7 billion to $ 5.8 billion over the next 5 years .
There is a tremendous need to develop automated methods of protein analysis of cell lines to better understand whole system biological function for improved drug therapy and early detection of disease , such as cancer .
Acquisition of a Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope for Cell Biology and BiophysicsProject SummaryA grant has been awarded to Dr Peter J.S .
Smith of the Marine Biological Laboratory ( MBL ) , Woods Hole , for the acquisition of a confocal laser scanning microscope and image analysis system with multiphoton excitation capability .
The system is to be housed in the MBL Central Microscopy Facility , making it available to a wide community of resident researchers , including scientists from the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute , visiting and summer investigators , as well as by many of the graduate- and postdoctoral-level education courses offered at the MBLSeveral proposed research projects have already been formulated by the investigating team , spanning basic biology to the biomedical sciences .
Amongst the resident community of the MBL these include1 .
An examination of vesicle trafficking in trypanosomes .
Part of a larger project dealing infectious diseases.2 .
The role of Ca/CaM kinase II dynamics in LTP .
Part of a larger project investigating the foundations of memory ; 3 .
The physiology of single-celled eukaryotic extremophiles .
Part of a larger project to investigate adaptive evolution and protein expression/modification.4 .
Multidrug resistance in pathogens .
5 .
Architectural dynamics of the mitotic spindle .
A continuing project on live imaging of cellular dynamics.6 .
Calcium oscillations in neurons .
A component of several ongoing projects looking at calcium activity domains in the cell membrane and cytosol.7 .
The effects of environmental pollutants on neuronal development .
A key issue being studied by MBL investigators in the field of toxicology.8 .
The mechanisms of iron trafficking in erythroid cells which forms part of a new mitochondrial program initiated at the MBL .
Scientists at the MBL have had a long interest in the study of cellular dynamics , which by necessity requires observations on living systems .
The microscope to be chosen maximizes this ability .
System components were chosen to provide 1 ) capability for confocal fluorescent imaging of different fluorophores in the visible spectrum ; 2 ) multiphoton excitation ; 3 ) emission fingerprinting for simultaneous recording of multiple fluorophores with closely-spaced emission spectra ; 4 ) a sufficient range of objective lenses to enable both structural studies and experiments on the physiology of living cells ; 5 ) precisely localization fluorescent-labeled structures ; 6 ) temperature control of live cells under study ; 7 ) software to use fully the data acquisition capabilities of the confocal ; and 8 ) software for image analysis and display .
The research activities proposed in the grant reflect the diversity of scientific interest amongst the MBL community as well as outreach in research and education .
The new microscope will be an invaluable addition the MBL facilities for cutting edge research .
Its availability to residents and visitors alike ( over 200 seasonal investigators visit the MBL for research purposes on an annual basis ) will insure a high impact and use for the grant awarded .
EIA -0215531Krim , HamidNorth Carolina State UniversityTITLE Workshop Proposal Genomic Signal Processing and StatisticsThis grant provides partial support for a Workshop on Genomic Signal Processing ands Statistics ( GENSIPS ) .
The workshop is being held October 12 and 13 , 2002 , near the North Carolina State University campus .
The goals of the workshop are 1 ) to identify potential areas of research collaboration between the biological , statistical and signal processing communities and 2 ) to explore potential new avenues of research in genetics by exploiting synergies in research between signal processing , statistics , and genonomics .
The workshop brings together a diverse set of outstanding researchers from each of these areas to address the challenges of the multidisciplinary area of genomics .
Twelve internationally known researchers are presenting plenary and invited talks and the workshop also features poster sessions and round-table discussions of the key topics .
